. 
. 
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3637528.3671470
. 
. 
TUTORIAL
A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards Retrieval-Augmented Large
Language Models
WENQI FAN, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
. 
YUJUAN DING, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
. 
LIANGBO NING, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
. 
SHIJIE WANG, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
. 
HENGYUN LI, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
. 
DAWEI YIN, Baidu, Inc., Beijing, China
. 
View all
. 
. 
Open Access Support provided by:
. 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
. 
National University of Singapore
. 
Baidu, Inc.
. 
PDF Download
3637528.3671470.pdf
24 January 2026
Total Citations: 324
Total Downloads: 18339
. 
. 
Published: 25 August 2024
. 
. 
Citation in BibTeX format
. 
. 
KDD '24: The 30th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining
August 25 - 29, 2024
Barcelona, Spain
. 
. 
Conference Sponsors:
SIGMOD
SIGKDD
KDD '24: Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (August 2024)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3637528.3671470
ISBN: 9798400704901
.
A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards Retrieval-Augmented
Large Language Models
Wenqi Fan
wenqifan03@gmail.com
The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, HK SAR
Yujuan Ding∗
dingyujuan385@gmail.com
The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, HK SAR
Liangbo Ning
BigLemon1123@gmail.com
The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, HK SAR
Shijie Wang
shijie.wang1999@outlook.com
The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, HK SAR
Hengyun Li
neilhengyun.li@polyu.edu.hk
The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, HK SAR
Dawei Yin
yindawei@acm.org
Baidu Inc, China
Tat-Seng Chua
dcscts@nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore,
Singapore
Qing Li
csqli@comp.polyu.edu.hk
The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, HK SAR
ABSTRACT
As one of the most advanced techniques in AI, Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) can offer reliable and up-to-date external knowl-
edge, providing huge convenience for numerous tasks. Particularly
in the era of AI-Generated Content (AIGC), the powerful capacity of
retrieval in providing additional knowledge enables RAG to assist
existing generative AI in producing high-quality outputs. Recently,
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated revolutionary
abilities in language understanding and generation, while still fac-
ing inherent limitations such as hallucinations and out-of-date in-
ternal knowledge. Given the powerful abilities of RAG in providing
the latest and helpful auxiliary information, Retrieval-Augmented
Large Language Models (RA-LLMs) have emerged to harness exter-
nal and authoritative knowledge bases, rather than solely relying
on the model’s internal knowledge, to augment the quality of the
generated content of LLMs. In this survey, we comprehensively
review existing research studies in RA-LLMs, covering three pri-
mary technical perspectives: architectures, training strategies, and
applications. Furthermore, to deliver deeper insights, we discuss
current limitations and several promising directions for future re-
search. Updated information about this survey can be found athttps:
// advanced-recommender-systems.github.io/ RAG-Meets-LLMs/ 1.
∗Corresponding author: Yujuan Ding
1For the long version of this survey, please refer to https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.06211
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(
s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0490-1/24/08. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3637528.3671470
CCS CONCEPTS
•General and reference → Surveys and overviews; •Comput-
ing methodologies → Natural language generation; •Infor-
mation systems → Retrieval models and ranking.
KEYWORDS
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG), Large Language Model
(LLM), Pre-training, Fine-tuning, In-context Learning, Prompting
ACM Reference Format:
Wenqi Fan, Yujuan Ding, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei
Yin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Qing Li. 2024. A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs:
Towards Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models. InProceedings of
the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD ’24), August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3637528.3671470
1 INTRODUCTION
As one of the most fundamental data mining techniques, retrieval
aims to understand the input query and extract relevant information
from external data sources [23, 29, 60, 118]. It has found extensive
application in various fields [8, 27, 90, 144], such as search, ques-
tion answering, and recommender systems. For instance, search
engines (e.g., Google, Bing, and Baidu) are the most successful ap-
plications of retrieval in the industry; they can filter and retrieve
the most relevant web pages or documents that can match a user’s
query [19, 144], enabling users to find the desired information effec-
tively. Meanwhile, retrieval models, through effective data mainte-
nance in external databases, can provide faithful and timely external
knowledge, thereby serving vital functions in various knowledge-
intensive tasks. Due to their powerful capacities, retrieval tech-
niques have been successfully incorporated into advanced genera-
tive models in the era of AI-Generated Content (AIGC) [68, 112, 134].
Notably, the integration of retrieval models with language mod-
els has given rise to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [66],
which has emerged as one of the most representative techniques
6491
KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain Wenqi Fan et al.
Spain won the
Women's World Cup
2023.
Which country won 
the Women's World
Cup 2023?
User w/o RAG
with RAG
Pre-trained
LLMs
External
Database
Output
Prompt
Output
Prompt
Query
Additional information:
New, Domain-specific, etc.
ContextAs of my last update
in January 2022, I
can't provide whichcountry won ... 2023.
Figure 1: Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) meets
Large Language Models (LLMs). When the user’s query is out-
of-scope, e.g., unseen content in training data or requiring
the latest information for the answer, LLMs might show in-
ferior generation performance. With the help of RAG, LLMs
can leverage additional relevant information from external
database to enhance their text generation capability.
in the field of generative AI, aiming to enhance the quality of the
generated text content with retrieved information [6, 66, 68].
More specifically, to facilitate the generation task in the NLP
area, RAG incorporates information or knowledge from external
data sources, which serves as supplementary reference/instruction
for the input query or the generated output [56, 87]. In general, RAG
first invokes the retriever to search and extract relevant documents
in the external database. These documents are then combined with
the original query as the context to enhance the answer generation
process [50]. In practice, RAG techniques are feasible and efficient
to apply in various generation tasks, by simply adapting the re-
trieval component and requiring minimal or even no additional
training[98]. Recent studies have demonstrated the great potential
of RAG not only for knowledge-intensive tasks such as open do-
main question answering (OpenQA) [6, 44, 92], but also for general
language tasks and downstream applications [56, 78, 134, 138].
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of pre-trained
foundation models, particularly Large Language Models (LLMs).
These models have demonstrated impressive performance across
various tasks [1, 18], such as recommender systems [37], molecule
discovery [68], and report generation [26]. Technically, the great
success of LLMs can be attributed to the advanced architecture with
billion-level parameters pre-training on a huge amount of training
corpus from various sources. These technical improvements lead
to the emergence of remarkable capabilities of LLMs [37, 157], par-
ticularly in language understanding and generation, in-context
learning, and other aspects. For instance, GPT-FAR introduces
detailed prompts to teach GPT-4 to perform image tagging, sta-
tistical analysis and text analysis for multi-modal fashion report
generation [26]. LLMs also achieve promising performance in rec-
ommender systems by understanding users’ preferences towards
items [37, 127]. Despite these success, LLMs still suffer from intrin-
sic limitations [37, 157], such as the lack of domain-specific knowl-
edge, the issue of “hallucination”, and the substantial computational
resources required for updating the LLMs. These problems are par-
ticularly notable in domain-specific fields like medicine and law. For
instance, a recent study has demonstrated that legal hallucinations
are pervasive and disturbing, with hallucination rates ranging from
69% to 88% in responses to specific legal queries for state-of-the-art
LLMs [20]. Moreover, the challenges of tackling the hallucination
problem become even harder due to the substantial computational
resources required for fine-tuning LLMs with domain-specific or
the latest data. This, in turn, significantly hinders the widespread
adoption of LLMs in various real-world applications.
To address these limitations, recent efforts have been made to
take advantage of RAG to enhance the capabilities of LLMs in var-
ious tasks [ 6, 49, 56, 114], especially those demanding high for
the latest and reliable knowledge such as Question Answer (QA),
AI4Science, and software engineering. For example, Lozano et al.
[80] introduces a scientific QA system based on retrieving scientific
literature dynamically. MolReGPT leverages RAG to enhance the
in-context learning ability of ChatGPT for molecular discovery [68].
It is also been demonstrated that RAG can effectively reduce halluci-
nations in conversational tasks [
116, 139]. As illustrated in Figure 1,
an LLM-based dialog system will not be able to answer well for
out-of-scope queries. With the help of RAG to retrieve relevant
knowledge from external database and integrate it into the process
of generation, the dialog system succeeds in giving correct answers.
Given the remarkable progress in advancing LLMs with RAG, there
is an imperative need for a systematic review of recent advances in
Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models (RA-LLMs).
This survey provides a comprehensive overview of RA-LLMs
by summarizing representative methods from the aspects of the
architecture, training strategy, and application area respectively.
It first review the architecture of existing RA-LLMs from three
primary perspectives: retrieval, generation, and augmentation in
Section 2. Training techniques are further summarized in Section 3.
Subsequently, various RA-LLMs applications are presented in Sec-
tion 4. In Section 5, key challenges and potential directions for
future exploration are further discussed. Due to the page limit, this
published version omits a part content including background knowl-
edge of LLMs, details of RA-LLM architectures, visual illustrations,
etc. Please refer to the long version for more information [32].
Concurrent to our survey, several related surveys have diverse fo-
cuses for RAG and LLMs. For example, Zhao et al. [156] specifically
review multi-modal information-based RAG techniques and Zhao
et al. [155] discuss the RAG for AIGC. Gao et al. [39] conduct a rela-
tively comprehensive overview of RAG for LLMs. Our survey differs
from these surveys in concentrating on technical perspectives and
systematically reviewing models according to the architecture and
training paradigm in RA-LLMs, as well as application tasks.
2 RETRIEV AL-AUGMENTED LARGE
LANGUAGE MODELS (RA-LLMS)
The RAG framework in the era of LLMs consists of several major
processes: retrieval, generation, and augmentation. In this section,
we will introduce important techniques involved in each process.
2.1 Retrieval
Given the query from the input of LLMs, the retriever is an infor-
mation provider in RAG, aiming to return relevant knowledge by
measuring the distance between the query and documents from
6492
A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain
the external knowledge sources. As shown in Figure 2, the retrieval
component consists of several compulsory or optional procedures
to function as a whole for effective information retrieval. The spe-
cific pipeline of the retrieval part is jointly determined by several
perspectives of design, such as retriever type and retrieval granu-
larity. In this subsection, we will introduce the existing retrieval
methods in RA-LLMs based on these key aspects.
2.1.1 Retriever Type. Retrieval methods can be generally catego-
rized into two types: sparse and dense, based on the information
encoding methods. Sparse retrieval is word-based and applied in
text retrieval mostly, while dense retrieval embeds queries and ex-
ternal knowledge into vector spaces and can be applied to various
data formats.
As a straightforward approach, sparse retrieval, e.g., TF-IDF and
BM25 [106, 121], usually relies on inverted index matching along
with the raw data input. For example, many studies directly ap-
ply BM25 for passage-level retrieval to facilitate their RAG [10, 52,
98, 137, 159, 160], where passages are specifically represented as
a bag of words and ranked based on term and inverse document
frequencies [
50]. On top of offering supplementary to enhance
the input of the generator, sparse retrieval has also been used to
find demonstrations to function in In-Context Learning (ICL) for
RA-LLMs [2, 83, 107, 117, 141]. The main limitation of applying
sparse retrieval in RAG is its no-training nature, which makes the
retrieval performance heavily rely on the quality of the database
and the query. Moreover, such fixed term-based methods only sup-
port similarity-based retrieval, while cannot be adapted for other
retrieval criteria possibly existing in LLM applications, such as the
diversity [30].
Dense retrieval, on the contrary, embeds the query and docu-
ments into continuous vector space with certain criteria, for exam-
ple, semantic similarity [55]. Dense retrieval methods are usually
trainable, therefore holding more flexibility and potential in adap-
tation. As the key component of dense retriever, the embedding
models have delicately different designs in existing RAG models.
A simple design [56, 64, 136] is to directly use a part of the gener-
ation model as the embedding layer of the retriever, which might
be able to enhance the alignment between the retrieval and gen-
eration processes. BERT-based backbone [ 24] is widely applied
in retrieval models. One common retriever design in RAG is to
construct two-stream encoders with the BERT structure (one en-
coder for the query and the other for the documents), which is
also called bi-encoder [114, 135]. Early-stage RAG methods tend to
freeze [6, 98] or partially freeze [66] the parameters of the retriever
to perform general-level relevant knowledge extraction and pay
more attention to the knowledge leveraging and generator fine-
tuning. Large-scale specialized pre-training further enhances RAG
models to excel in more knowledge-intensive tasks. One typical
success is Dense Passage Retriever (DPR) [55], which uses a BERT-
based backbone and is pre-trained specifically for the OpenQA task
with question-answer pair data. A recent study [103] has also dis-
covered that DPR training decentralizes how knowledge is stored
in the network, creating multiple access pathways to the same in-
formation. With effective fine-tuning, bi-encoder retrievers are also
applied widely in ICL-based RAG [72, 81, 86, 93, 107, 141]. Specif-
ically, they have been more often used for sentence embedding
Large Language
Models
Searching 
Input Output
Datastore 
Retrieved
Documents
Chunking  Indexing  
Retrieval
Augmentation
Generation
Input Layer
Integration
Intermediate Layer
Integration
Output Layer
Integration
Embedding 
Figure 2: Illustration of the basic Retrieval-Augmented Large
Language Models (RA-LLMs) framework, which consists of
three major components: retrieval, generation, and augmen-
tation. Retrieval includes different procedures depending
on the specific designs. The retrieved documents are fur-
ther leveraged in generation with the augmentation module,
which may be at different integration stages.
similarity-based retrieval, as well as for some special requirement
in ICL, such as diverse example retrieval [141]. Another stream of
dense retrievers having been widely applied in RA-LLMs uses one
encoder only, which may be based on Transformer, BERT or other
off-the-shelf sequence modeling backbones. These one-encoder
retrievers are generally pre-trained on large-scale unaligned doc-
uments by contrastive learning [103], which may therefore excel
for their versatility, meaning that they can transfer and generalize
better to new domains or tasks. Such general-purpose pre-trained
retrievers, e.g., Contriever [40] and Spider [99], would be more flexi-
ble to use in LLMs targeting on various tasks and have demonstrated
their effectiveness in many RA-LLM methods, such as In-Context
RALM [98], Atlas [51] and Self-RAG [5].
2.1.2 Retrieval Granularity. Retrieval granularity denotes the re-
trieval unit in which the corpus is indexed, e.g., document, passage,
token, or other levels like entity. For RAG, the choice of retrieval
granularity can significantly impact the overall performance of the
model in terms of effectiveness and efficiency as they determine
the saving space for the database as well as the computational cost
for searching [4]. Early stage retrieval-augmented language mod-
els [10] propose to retrieve whole pieces of documents, and then
apply a machine comprehension model trained to detect answer
spans in the returned documents, which focuses more on language
reading and key information locating in the document. In gener-
ative language models, Chunk retrieval (also called passages in
some references [44, 52, 55]) is common, which has been used in
both traditional and LLM-based RAG models such as REALM [44],
RAG [66] and Atlas [51]. A more fine-grained retrieval, i.e., token
retrieval, instead can be done with faster searching but will bring
more burden for the database saving. Token retrieval is more suit-
able in cases requiring rare patterns or out-of-domain data [ 56],
meanwhile cooperates well with the every-token retrieval strat-
egy as applied in kNN-LM and other similar work [45, 88, 145]. In
6493
KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain Wenqi Fan et al.
comparison, a text chunk may contain compact and complete infor-
mation with less redundancy and irrelevancy, therefore becoming
the mainstream retrieval text granularity in RAG.
Another major retrieval granularity proposed in RAG is entity
retrieval. Unlike the above types of granularity, entity retrieval is
designed from the perspective of knowledge rather than language.
Févry et al . [38] introduce the Entities as Experts (EAE) model,
which divides the parameter space of language models according
to the entity identity. The proposed EAE model aims to learn entity
representations from the text along with other model parameters
with the Wikipedia database and represent knowledge with entity
memory. At a more fine-grained level, de Jong et al. [21] propose to
build the knowledge base by learning and retrieving mention rather
than entity. Overall, applying entity or mention-level retrieval in
RAG would be more effective for entity-centric tasks, and more
efficient in space compared to token-wise retrieval.
2.2 Generation
The design of the generator heavily depends on the downstream
tasks. For most text generation tasks, Decoder-only and Encoder-
Decoder are two dominant structures [ 157]. The recent develop-
ment of commercial closed-sourced large foundation models makes
black-box generation models mainstream in RA-LLMs. In this part,
we will briefly review studies with these two types of genera-
tors: parameter-accessible (white-box) and parameter-inaccessible
(black-box).
2.2.1 Parameter-Accessible Generators (White-box). The structure
of Encoder-Decoder processes the input and the target independently
with different sets of parameters, in which a cross-attention compo-
nent is developed to connect input tokens to target tokens. Repre-
sentative Encoder-Decoder models include T5 [97] and BART [65].
In comparison, Decoder-only models process inputs and targets after
concatenation, which makes the representations of the two parts
concurrently built layer-by-layer as they propagate up the network.
These two types of generators are widely applied in existing RAG
work. For example, RAG [66] and Re2G [42] employ BART; FID [50]
and EMDR2 utilize T5. There are other models [6, 73] leveraging
Transformer-based Encoder-Decoder architecture but with some
customized design. Generators in RAG differ themselves from gen-
eral ones by incorporating retrieved data to enhance the generation
accuracy and relevance. Furthermore, white-box generators allow
parameter optimization, which can be trained to adapt to different
retrieval and augmentation approaches for a better performance of
generation.
2.2.2 Parameter-Inaccessible Generators (Black-box). A certain pro-
portion of LLMs are released without the disclosure of internal
structures or the accessibility of parameters, especially those par-
ticularly large-scale ones such as GPT series [1], Codex [12] and
Claude, which are called black-box generation models. These gen-
erators only allow the operations of feeding queries (input) and re-
ceiving responses (output) while not allowing the internal structure
to be altered or parameters to be updated. From another perspec-
tive, LLMs, even those open for fine-tuning, are large in scale and
difficult to tune for downstream domain-specific tasks with only a
limited amount of data. Black-box RA-LLMs, therefore, focus more
on the retrieval and augmentation processes, trying to enhance
the generator by augmenting the input (also called prompt in the
context of LLMs) with better knowledge, guidance, or examples for
the generation. For example, Rubin et al. [107] proposes to train a
prompt retriever with the data labeled by language models them-
selves, which can be used to provide better examples for in-context
learning, therefore enhancing the final generation performance. Xu
et al. [137] propose to compress the retrieved documents before
in-context integration, which can reduce the computational costs
and also relieve the burden of LMs to identify relevant information
in long retrieved documents.
2.3 Retrieval Integration for Generation
Augmentation
Augmentation describes the technical process that integrates re-
trieval and generation parts, which is the essential part of RA-LLMs.
In this subsection, we introduce three main designs of augmenta-
tion, which are conducted at the input, output, and intermediate
layers of generator respectively, as illustrated in Figure 2.
2.3.1 Input-Layer Integration. A common way to integrate retrieved
information/documents is to combine them with the original in-
put/query and jointly pass them to the generator, which is called
input-layer integration. For example, In-Context RALM [98] applies
input-layer integration by specifically concatenating the original
input and all retrieved documents into a single sequence as the
new input for the generation model. Despite the effectiveness, such
integration is limited to the number of retrieved documents, since
the concatenated new input may be too long to be processed by
the generation model. In-context RALM specifically alleviates this
limitation by removing tokens from the beginning of the new in-
put. To avoid information loss with such a token removing strategy,
FID [50] employs a different integration method that processes each
retrieved document independently in the encoder. This strategy
is scalable to a large number of contexts as it only performs self-
attention over one context at a time in the follow-up processing.
Atlas [
51] and REPLUG [114] apply a similar parallel integration
by concatenating the query and one retrieved document at a time.
In general, most black-box generation-based RAG methods apply
input-layer integration since neither the intermediate layer of the
generation model or the output distribution is accessible.
More specially for LLMs, input-layer integration may use the
retrieved content as (additional) prompts or demonstrations on top
of using it as supplementary to the original input as in traditional
RAGs [107]. Prompt retrieval aims to find suitable natural language
prompts automatically through retrieval to teach the LLM to learn
in context [7] or to induce the LLM to reason[133]. It may boost
the zero-shot ability of LLMs without delicate prompt engineering.
For example, Cheng et al. [16] propose to learn a prompt retriever
based on the input-prompt pair data with score labels resulting
from a frozen LLM.
2.3.2 Output-Layer Integration. Another kind of augmentation is
post-hoc, i.e., output-layer integration, which joints retrieval and
generation results. For example, kNN-LM [ 56] interpolates two
next-token distributions in prediction: one induced by the LM and
6494
A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain
the other induced by the nearest neighbors from the retrieval cor-
pus. Output-layer linear integration [43, 159] is flexible to apply
since it can be plugged into most generation models without addi-
tional training. However, the simplicity of output-layer integration
also limits the model’s ability to reason about the retrieved text.
To tackle this limitation, Yogatama et al. [145] propose to add an
extra gating network to post-process the retrieved data and achieve
comparatively better performance. For LLMs, output-layer inte-
gration is as reasonable and adaptive as input-layer integration.
REFEED [148] proposes an answer refining mechanism that applies
an LLM to evaluate the retrieved information and adjust the initial
answer accordingly to enhance the accuracy of the response. Sim-
ilarly, Zhang et al. [154] propose the COMBO framework, which
matches LLM-generated passages with retrieved counterparts into
compatible pairs based on pre-trained discriminators. The passage
pairs are then handled by a Fusion-in-Decoder-based [50] to derive
a final answer.
2.3.3 Intermediate-Layer Integration. Compared to the above two
non-parametric approaches, a more engaging augmentation is to
design a semi-parametric module to integrate the retrieved results
through the internal layers of the generation model, which is called
intermediate-layer integration. Such integration might add addi-
tional complexity and is promising to enhance the capability of the
generation model with effective training. Typically, a Transformer
module is introduced to leverage retrieved information (mostly
encoded into dense representations) into the generation model to
interact with the representations in the middle stage of the genera-
tion. For example, RETRO[6] introduces a Chunked Cross Attention
(CCA) layer to process the retrieved chunks in the generator blocks,
and Wu et al. [136]introduces the kNN-Augmented Attention Layer.
Similarly, EAE [38] and TOME [21] use Entity Memory and Mem-
oryAttention layer to incorporate the retrieved Entity and Entity
Mentions, respectively. Such intermediate-layer integration can
use many blocks frequently and efficiently to enhance the capa-
bility of the whole RAG model. It offers an efficient alternative to
incorporate a large number of text chunks frequently retrieved,
which are challenging to process with input-layer integration due
to the input length limit of LMs [6]. However, it also needs to be
noted that intermediate-layer integration requires high access to
the generation models, which is not feasible for most LLMs that
are accessible through inference APIs [85].
3 RA-LLMS TRAINING
Based on whether training is required or not, existing RAG methods
can be categorized into two main classes: train-free approaches
and training-based approaches. Training-free methods usually
directly leverage the retrieved knowledge during inference time
without introducing extra training by inserting the retrieved text
into the prompt, which is computationally efficient. However, one
potential challenge is that the retriever and generator components
are not specifically optimized for downstream tasks, which could
easily lead to suboptimal utilization of the retrieved knowledge.
To fully exploit the external knowledge, extensive methods are
proposed to fine-tune the retriever and generator, thereby guiding
large language models to effectively adapt and integrate retrieved
information. According to the training strategies, we categorize
these training-based approaches into three classes: 1)Independent
Training approaches independently train each component in the
RAG procedure, 2)Sequential Training methods train one module
first and freeze the well-trained component to guide the tuning
process of the other part, and 3) Joint Training approaches train
retriever and generator simultaneously. In the following section,
we will comprehensively review the training-free, independent
training, sequential training, and joint training methods.
3.1 Training-free
With the huge number of parameters, large language models have
exhibited human-level intelligence and achieved promising pre-
diction performance on various downstream tasks. However, it is
extremely challenging to frequently perform fine-tuning and up-
date the knowledge stored in the model parameters [66] due to the
considerable time and computational resources required. Recently,
numerous studies have suggested enhancing large language models
with retrieval mechanisms, enabling them to dynamically acquire
new knowledge from external sources without extra training pro-
cesses (i.e., training-free) [50, 52, 57], instead of relying solely on
the implicit knowledge encoded in the model’s parameters. These
approaches have shown significant performance improvement for
various knowledge-intensive tasks, such as open-domain question
answering [66] and document summarization [ 120]. According
to the different ways in which large language models utilize re-
trieved information, we categorize these training-free methods into
two categories: 1) Prompt Engineering-based Methods inte-
grate retrieved knowledge into the original prompt directly, and 2)
Retrieval-Guided Token Generation Methods retrieve infor-
mation to calibrate the token generation process.
3.1.1 Prompt Engineering-based Methods. As the LLMs’ genera-
tion performance highly depends on the input query, numerous
training-free RAG approaches employ external knowledge by re-
fining the original prompts [52, 57, 71]. Specifically, the retrieved
texts are usually used as contextual information and combined with
the original prompt to guide the generation of large language mod-
els [50, 52, 57, 59, 71, 94, 129]. For example, In-Context RALM [98]
keeps the large language model parameters unchanged and directly
incorporates the retrieved document before the original prompt to
augment the generation process. IRCoT [124] interleaves chain-of-
thought (CoT) generation and knowledge retrieval steps, enabling
the retrieval of more relevant information for the subsequent rea-
soning compared to standard retrieval methods that rely solely on
the question as the query. Instead of retrieving knowledge from a
large corpus, GENREAD [147] first prompts a large language model
to generate contextual documents for the query, and then based
on them to generates answers. SKR [130] proposes guiding LMs to
determine whether they can answer a given question based on their
internal knowledge, enabling flexible utilization of both internal and
external knowledge by selectively calling the retriever. TOC [59]
first retrieves relevant knowledge for ambiguous questions and
recursively constructs a tree structure by clarifying ambiguous
questions into multiple disambiguate questions, which is further
aggregated to generate long-form answers.
6495
KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain Wenqi Fan et al.
3.1.2 Retrieval-Guided Token Generation Methods. In addition to
directly integrating external knowledge into the original prompt,
the auxiliary information can be employed to adjust the token gen-
eration process. For example, KNN-KMs [56] first retrieves 𝑘 most
relevant contexts from the datastore based on the given query, and
computes a neighbor distribution based on the distance. The output
distribution is calibrated by interpolating the neighbor distribution
and the original model’s output distribution. Rest [46] is proposed
to replace the parametric draft model with a non-parametric re-
trieval datastore, and retrieves relevant tokens based on the current
context for speculative decoding [9, 63, 122].
3.2 Independent Training
Independent training refers to training the retriever and large lan-
guage models (LLMs) as two entirely independent processes, in
which there is no interaction between the retriever and the LLMs
during the training process [55, 62, 160]. For the training of large
language models, the negative loglikelihood loss is the most repre-
sentative training objective [96, 123], which aims to guide the large
language models to generate desired output 𝑦 based on the given
input 𝑥, formulated as − log 𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 (𝑦|𝑥). Regarding the retriever, it
can be categorized into two types: 1) Sparse retriever [ 101, 106],
and 2) Dense retriever [55, 62, 160]. The sparse retrievers usually
exploit sparse features, e.g., word frequencies, to represent the doc-
uments and calculate the relevance scores based on task-specific
metrics [68, 101, 106] such as TF-IDF and BM25. As for the dense
retrievers, deep neural networks are employed to encode the query
and documents into dense representations, and then the inner prod-
uct is usually used to calculate relevance scores and retrieve the
relevant external knowledge. For example, DPR [
55] adopts two
independent BERT [ 24] networks to encode the query and pas-
sages respectively, and trains these models by utilizing contrastive
learning. CoG [62] proposes to train a prefix encoder and a phrase
encoder for retrieval and reformulate the text generation as multiple
copy-and-paste operations from existing source text collection.
3.3 Sequential Training
Independent training is an efficient approach to exploit the external
knowledge during the generation process, since the retriever and
generator can be trained offline and any off-the-shelf models can be
utilized, avoiding extra training costs. To better enhance the synergy
between the retriever and generator, several methods have been
proposed to train the retriever and large language models sequen-
tially. In these sequential training methods, the process typically
begins with the independent pretraining of either the retriever or
the generator, after which the pretrained module is fixed while the
other module undergoes training. Note that various existing models
(e.g., BERT [24], CLIP [95], T5 [97]) can be directly employed as the
fixed retriever and generator, thereby bypassing the first pertaining
process. Compared to independent training, sequential training
involves coordinated training of the retriever and generator, where
the trainable module benefits from the assistance of the fixed mod-
ule. Based on different training orders, sequential training can be
categorized into two classes: 1) Retriever First [5, 108, 109, 126],
and 2) LLMs First [110, 114, 128].
3.3.1 Retriever First. These methods first train the retrieval model
and then fix it. Large language models are then trained by utiliz-
ing the retrieved knowledge. For instance, RETRO [6] adopts the
BERT model that is pretrained independently as the retriever, and
an encoder-decoder architecture is trained to integrate retrieval
chunks into the model’s predictions. RALMs [146] adopts Google
Search and the open-source COLBERTV2 [ 58] as the pretrained
retriever and fine-tunes the large language model to effectively
leverage the retrieved passages. ITER-RTGEN [105] utilizes the pre-
trained S-BERT [104] as the retriever and introduces an adaptive hy-
brid retrieval strategy for retrieving demonstrations. Additionally,
it leverages T5 [97] as the generator, which undergoes further fine-
tuning based on the target label and input combining the original
prompt with retrieved demonstrations. SMALLCAP [102] proposes
using the CLIP [95], which is a powerful pretrianed multimodal
network, to encode the input image and the textual data of the ex-
ternal datastore and retrieve the most relevant items based on the
cosine similarity. A cross-attention layer is trained and GPT-2 [96]
is used as the decoder to produce captions.
3.3.2 LLMs First. Similarly, we can also pre-train large language
models first, and then tune the retriever under the supervision of the
well-trained LLMs. For example, DKRR [49] shows that attention
scores from a sequence-to-sequence model can indicate the docu-
ment’s relevance. Therefore, they propose to leverage the attention
scores of a reader model to produce synthetic labels to train the
retriever. AAR [149] proposes using a small language model to gen-
erate the supervised signal for training retrievers. The well-trained
retriever can be further leveraged to enhance the performance of
large black-box language models. RA-DIT [75] first fine-tune the
large language models to enhance their ability to leverage retrieved
knowledge, and then train the retriever to better align its output
with large language models. UPRISE [16] proposes a lightweight
method to enhance the zero-shot performance of LLMs in unseen
tasks by introducing a prompt retriever. A frozen LLM is employed
to guide the fine-tuning process of the prompt retriever, and this
retriever then retrieves prompts for different tasks with various
LLMs during inference.
3.4 Joint Training
Joint training methods [17, 47, 54, 70, 159] employ the end-to-end
paradigm to optimize the retriever and generator simultaneously.
Instead of training each module sequentially, joint training methods
effectively enhance the retriever’s ability to locate external knowl-
edge for generation and the generator’s capacity to effectively lever-
age the retrieved information. For instance, RAG [66] minimizes the
negative loglikelihood to jointly train the retriever and generator.
REALM [44] adopts a similar training paradigm to that of RAG [66],
and Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) [15, 28, 100, 111] tech-
nique is used to locate the most relevant documents. To employ
MIPS, all external documents are embedded first and a search index
is produced for each embedding. An asynchronous index updating
strategy [44, 48, 51, 119] is proposed to refresh the index every
several hundred training steps to avoid time consumption of re-
indexing all documents.
6496
A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain
4 APPLICATIONS
In this section, we will introduce some representative applications
of retrieval-augmented large language models (RA-LLMs). To pro-
vide a clear overview of the applications of RA-LLMs, we will review
them from three perspectives: NLP applications, downstream tasks,
and domain-specific applications.
4.1 NLP Applications
Due to the intrinsic capability in text generation, RA-LLMs have
various applications in the NLP field, such as Question Answer
(QA) Systems, ChatBot, and Fact Verification.
4.1.1 QA Systems. QA Systems aim to provide precise answers
to user’s queries. However, even when trained on extensive data,
these systems may lack the latest information or specific domain
knowledge that is not included in their training data [50, 79]. To
address this limitation, the integration of RA-LLMs has played a cru-
cial role in advancing the capabilities of QA systems by enhancing
their ability to retrieve and synthesize relevant information [6, 50].
Specifically, RA-LLMs can provide coherent and contextually rele-
vant answers by leveraging their retrieval component to access a
vast knowledge base. For example, REALM [44] integrates a knowl-
edge retriever that can retrieve information from a large corpus
during pre-training, fine-tuning, and inference. This approach al-
lows REALM to effectively retrieve from a vast knowledge corpus,
thereby improving the accuracy of its responses. Similarly, Fusion-
in-Decoder [50] retrieves passages from support documents and
then fuses them with questions to generate the answer, achieving
higher accuracy. In addition, Borgeaud et al. [6] indicate that the
quality of the answers may rely more on the result of retrieval.
4.1.2 ChatBot. ChatBot is designed to interact with users in a
natural and conversational manner [ 76]. Different from the QA
system, ChatBot focuses on maintaining a coherent and contextu-
ally rich conversation with the user. To enhance these capabilities,
recent methods focus on integrating RA-LLMs [54, 61, 152] for its
ability to augment the ChatBot with relevant external knowledge,
facilitating more engaging and context-rich interactions with users.
For example, some studies [ 14, 41] retrieve relevant knowledge
from static databases (e.g., a Wikipedia dump) to augment conver-
sation. Komeili et al. [61] propose retrieving information from the
internet search to further augment conversation performance. Con-
sidering the dynamic nature of knowledge in the world, another
model [125] further accesses large amounts of dynamic information
in search engines to generate responses.
4.1.3 Fact Verification. Fact Verification is a critical task in veri-
fying the accuracy and reliability of information. With the need
for trusted evidence, RA-LLMs are being utilized to enhance the
capabilities of fact verification [
51, 66, 66]. Lewis et al . [66] first
propose retrieval of external knowledge to augment a range of
knowledge-intensive tasks including fact verification. On the other
hand, Atlas [51] examines the performance of the RA-LLMs for fact
verification under few-shot learning. Recently, Self-RAG [5] has
greatly made a notable impression by incorporating a self-reflective
mechanism. Specifically, Self-RAG reflects on whether retrieved
information is helpful and judges the reliability of retrieved infor-
mation, thereby greatly improving the verification accuracy.
4.2 Downstream Tasks
RA-LLMs can also be applied to various downstream tasks, such as
recommendations and software engineering.
4.2.1 Recommendations. Recommender systems play an impor-
tant role in modeling users’ preferences and providing personalized
recommendations [33–35, 127, 153, 158]. Recently, RA-LLMs have
demonstrated great potential in providing personalized and con-
textually relevant recommendations by integrating retrieval and
generation processes [25, 82, 134]. For example, Di Palma [25] pro-
poses a simple retrieval-augmented recommendation model, that
leverages knowledge from movie or book datasets to enhance rec-
ommendations. Additionally, Lu et al. [82] further retrieval from
the reviews to enrich item information in recommender systems.
CoRAL [134] utilizes reinforcement learning to retrieve collabo-
rative information from the dataset and align it with semantic
information for more accurate recommendations.
4.2.2 Software Engineering. The rise of RA-LLMs has influenced
many aspects of software engineering [89, 142, 160]. For example,
some studies propose the retrieval-augmented generation paradigm
for code generation [160] and program repair [89]. Similarly, Parvez
et al. [91]retrieve top-ranked codes or summaries from the codebase
and aggregate them with input to enhance code generation and
summarization. In addition, RA-LLMs show potential in tabular data
processing [67, 142] and Text-to-SQL semantic parsing [93, 113].
4.3 Domain-specific Applications
RA-LLMs have been widely adopted for various domain-specific
tasks, such as AI for Science and Finance.
4.3.1 AI for Science. RA-LLMs have proven to be beneficial for
the realms of science, such as molecular and protein. Molecules
include identifying the molecule’s property and predicting new
molecules, thereby favoring drug discovery. Currently, some RA-
LLMs have been applied to molecules by integrating retrieval of
molecule structure and biomedical entities like protein, molecule,
and disease [78, 131, 132, 140], etc. Li et al. [68], Wang et al. [131]
propose retrieval-based frameworks by retrieving from the database
to guide molecule generation. Liu et al. [78]introduce a multi-modal
molecule structure-text model by retrieving textual knowledge from
a large-scale dataset for molecular property prediction. In addition,
RA-LLMs also significantly influence Protein representation and
generation. For instance, RSA [84] queries protein sequences as-
sociated with a collection of structurally or functionally similar
sequences in the database to enhance protein representations. Fur-
thermore, Lozano et al. [80] present a clinical QA system based on
retrieving published review articles.
4.3.2 Finance. In the highly data-driven and information-intensive
field of finance, RA-LLMs have proved to be a significant technology
for enhancing decision-making [69, 143, 151]. For example, Zhang
et al. [151] retrieve financial information from external sources,
such as news platforms (e.g., Bloomberg and Reuters) and social
media platforms (e.g., Twitter, Reddit), to combine with the original
query to enhance the precision of financial sentiment analysis. In
addition, financial QA is another primary task of financial analysis,
6497
KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain Wenqi Fan et al.
which usually extracts relevant knowledge from financial docu-
ments. As professional documents are usually stored in PDF format,
Lin [74] introduces a PDF parser combined with RA-LLMs to re-
trieve knowledge from financial reports. On the other hand, Yepes
et al. [143] propose a document chunking method based on struc-
ture instead of chunking based on paragraphs, further improving
the quality of RA-LLMs outputs.
5 FUTURE CHALLENGES AND
OPPORTUNITIES
Since the studies of RA-LLMs are still in the early stage, we present
some potential research directions that can be explored in the future
in the field of RA-LLMs.
Trustworthy RA-LLMs. The essential objective of developing
RAG-empowered LLMs is to enhance the capability of the language
models, thereby benefiting users and society by alleviating redun-
dant and meaningless labor, increasing conveniences, and spurring
social progress. However, recent research indicates that RA-LLMs
can be maliciously and unintentionally manipulated to make un-
reliable decisions and harm humans [
22, 162], which may have
serious consequences in safety-critical scenarios [11, 13, 31, 36, 77].
In addition, private retrieval database has a risk of leakage, raising
concerns regarding the privacy of RA-LLMs [150]. Therefore, de-
veloping trustworthy RA-LLMs is of paramount importance as it
can significantly mitigate the potential negative impacts of LLMs
technology and provide people with powerful AI models that can be
fully trusted. To be specific, the ideal trustworthiness in RA-LLMs
systems should possess the following characteristics: 1) robust-
ness, 2) fairness, 3) explainability, and 4) privacy. For example,
robustness means a trustworthy RA-LLMs system should be ro-
bust against malicious or inadvertent perturbations introduced by
attackers. Fairness indicates a trustworthy RA-LLMs system ought
to avoid discrimination during the decision-making process. Ex-
plainability requires a complete understanding of the intrinsic
workings of RA-LLMs systems, i.e., the predictions of RA-LLMs sys-
tems are explainable and transparent. Privacy entails safeguarding
the safety of this private information housed within the datastore
when establishing trustworthy RA-LLMs systems.
Multi-Lingual RA-LLMs. The ability to leverage knowledge from
multiple languages can greatly enhance the capabilities of retrieval-
augmented large language models. As the world becomes increas-
ingly interconnected, there is a growing need for AI systems that
can understand and communicate across different languages. By
incorporating multilingual knowledge retrieval and generation,
these models can access and synthesize information from diverse
linguistic sources, enabling more comprehensive and nuanced un-
derstanding and generation capabilities. Additionally, multilingual
models can facilitate cross-cultural communication and knowledge
sharing and breaking down language barriers, thereby bringing con-
venience to people across different regions of the world, especially
those in areas with minority languages [53, 71]. For example, users
from countries with less prevalent languages can utilize abundant
English and Chinese corpora for knowledge retrieval, enhancing
the performance of large language models in downstream tasks.
Multimodal RA-LLMs. Multimodal retrieval-augmented genera-
tion extends the knowledge sources beyond text to include various
data modalities such as images, videos, and audio. By integrating
various modalities, LLMs can leverage richer contextual informa-
tion than single-modal RAG and develop a more comprehensive
understanding of users’ needs, bringing precise, fine-grained, and
high-quality generation. For instance, an image or video can provide
valuable visual cues that complement textual information, leading
to more precise language generation [47, 161]. By effectively fus-
ing multiple modalities, multimodal RA-LLMs can develop a more
comprehensive understanding of the world, leading to more accu-
rate and insightful outputs, benefiting a wide range of domains,
including healthcare [161], drug discovery [115], molecular analy-
sis [3, 78, 115], etc.
Quality of External Knowledge. As a commonly used datastore
in current RAG systems, Wikipedia [55, 161] serves as a vast reposi-
tory of external textual knowledge used to augment the generation
process, which contains millions of articles covering various disci-
plines. However, the reliability and accuracy of individual articles
within Wikipedia vary significantly, and the introduction of some
texts that deviate from facts might even mislead the model’s gener-
ation process. Therefore, it is crucial to enhance the quality of the
external knowledge corpus and mitigate the negative impact of low-
quality knowledge on the performance of LLMs. By enhancing the
quality of the external knowledge and tailing robust mechanisms
by filtering out low-quality or unreliable information, the RA-LLM
systems might produce more accurate, reliable outputs, thereby
improving their effectiveness in various real-world applications.
6 CONCLUSION
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), a cutting-edge AI tech-
nique, has achieved remarkable success across various applications,
including recommendation, molecule generation, protein represen-
tation, and software engineering, owing to the potent capabilities of
retrieval in providing supplementary information to enhance gen-
eration performance. Recently, increasing efforts have been made
to alleviate the limitations of large language models (LLMs), such
as hallucination and out-of-date internal knowledge, by leveraging
retrieval to provide the latest auxiliary information and teaching
LLMs to harness the retrieved external knowledge. With the rapid
advancements in retrieval-augmented large language models (RA-
LLMs), there is a pressing need for a comprehensive and systematic
overview. To bridge this gap, in this paper, we comprehensively
review the RA-LLMs from the perspectives of model architecture,
training strategy, and application area, providing researchers with
an in-depth understanding. Moreover, since the studies of RA-LLMs
are still in the early stage, we also discuss the current limitations
and several potential research directions for future research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research described in this paper has been partly supported
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (project no.
62102335), General Research Funds from the Hong Kong Research
Grants Council (project no. PolyU 15200021, 15207322, and 15200023),
internal research funds from The Hong Kong Polytechnic Uni-
versity (project no. P0036200, P0042693, P0048625, P0048752, and
P0051361), Research Collaborative Project no. P0041282, and SHTM
Interdisciplinary Large Grant (project no. P0043302).
6498
A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain
REFERENCES
[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal
Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).
[2] Sweta Agrawal, Chunting Zhou, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Marjan
Ghazvininejad. 2023. In-context Examples Selection for Machine Translation.
In ACL (Findings). 8857–8873.
[3] Miles C Andrews, Junna Oba, Chang-Jiun Wu, Haifeng Zhu, Tatiana Karpinets,
Caitlin A Creasy, Marie-Andrée Forget, Xiaoxing Yu, Xingzhi Song, Xizeng
Mao, et al. 2022. Multi-modal molecular programs regulate melanoma cell state.
Nature communications 13, 1 (2022), 4000.
[4] Akari Asai, Sewon Min, Zexuan Zhong, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Retrieval-based
language models and applications. In ACL (Tutorial). 41–46.
[5] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023.
Self-RAG: Learning to Retrieve, Generate, and Critique through Self-Reflection.
In ICLR.
[6] Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Ruther-
ford, Katie Millican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bog-
dan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al. 2022. Improving language models by retrieving
from trillions of tokens. In ICML. 2206–2240.
[7] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS.
[8] Stefan Buttcher, Charles LA Clarke, and Gordon V Cormack. 2016. Information
retrieval: Implementing and evaluating search engines. Mit Press.
[9] Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Lau-
rent Sifre, and John Jumper. 2023. Accelerating large language model decoding
with speculative sampling. arXiv:2302.01318 (2023).
[10] Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Reading
Wikipedia to Answer Open-Domain Questions. In ACL. 1870–1879.
[11] Jingfan Chen, Wenqi Fan, Guanghui Zhu, Xiangyu Zhao, Chunfeng Yuan, Qing
Li, and Yihua Huang. 2022. Knowledge-enhanced Black-box Attacks for Recom-
mendations. In KDD. 108–117.
[12] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde
de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[13] Xiao Chen, Wenqi Fan, Jingfan Chen, Haochen Liu, Zitao Liu, Zhaoxiang Zhang,
and Qing Li. 2023. Fairly adaptive negative sampling for recommendations. In
WWW. 3723–3733.
[14] Xiuyi Chen, Fandong Meng, Peng Li, Feilong Chen, Shuang Xu, Bo Xu, and Jie
Zhou. 2020. Bridging the gap between prior and posterior knowledge selection
for knowledge-grounded dialogue generation. In EMNLP. 3426–3437.
[15] Yudong Chen, Zhihui Lai, Yujuan Ding, Kaiyi Lin, and Wai Keung Wong. 2019.
Deep supervised hashing with anchor graph. In ICCV. 9796–9804.
[16] Daixuan Cheng, Shaohan Huang, Junyu Bi, Yuefeng Zhan, Jianfeng Liu, Yujing
Wang, Hao Sun, Furu Wei, Weiwei Deng, and Qi Zhang. 2023. UPRISE: Universal
Prompt Retrieval for Improving Zero-Shot Evaluation. InEMNLP. 12318–12337.
[17] Xin Cheng, Di Luo, Xiuying Chen, Lemao Liu, Dongyan Zhao, and Rui Yan.
2024. Lift yourself up: Retrieval-augmented text generation with self-memory.
In NeurIPS.
[18]
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav
Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Se-
bastian Gehrmann, et al. 2023. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
J Mach Learn Res 24, 240 (2023), 1–113.
[19] W Bruce Croft, Donald Metzler, and Trevor Strohman. 2010. Search engines:
Information retrieval in practice. Vol. 520. Addison-Wesley Reading.
[20] Matthew Dahl, Varun Magesh, Mirac Suzgun, and Daniel E Ho. 2024. Large legal
fictions: Profiling legal hallucinations in large language models.arXiv:2401.01301
(2024).
[21] Michiel de Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy, Nicholas FitzGerald, Fei Sha, and William W.
Cohen. 2022. Mention Memory: incorporating textual knowledge into Trans-
formers through entity mention attention. In ICLR.
[22] Gelei Deng, Yi Liu, Kailong Wang, Yuekang Li, Tianwei Zhang, and Yang Liu.
2024. Pandora: Jailbreak GPTs by Retrieval Augmented Generation Poisoning.
arXiv:2402.08416 (2024).
[23] Ziqing Deng, Zhihui Lai, Yujuan Ding, Heng Kong, and Xu Wu. 2024. Deep
Scaling Factor Quantization Network for Large-scale Image Retrieval. In ICMR.
851–859.
[24] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.
In NAACL-HLT (1). 4171–4186.
[25] Dario Di Palma. 2023. Retrieval-augmented recommender system: Enhancing
recommender systems with large language models. In RecSys. 1369–1373.
[26] Yujuan Ding, Yunshan Ma, Wenqi Fan, Yige Yao, Tat-Seng Chua, and Qing Li.
2024. FashionReGen: LLM-Empowered Fashion Report Generation. In WWW.
[27] Yujuan Ding, P. Y. Mok, Yunshan Ma, and Yi Bin. 2023. Personalized fashion
outfit generation with user coordination preference learning. IP&M 60, 5 (2023),
103434.
[28] Yujuan Ding, Wai Keung Wong, Zhihui Lai, and Zheng Zhang. 2020. Bilinear
Supervised Hashing Based on 2D Image Features. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol. 30, 2 (2020), 590–602.
[29] Yujuan Ding, Wai Keung Wong, Zhihui Lai, and Zheng Zhang. 2020. Discrim-
inative dual-stream deep hashing for large-scale image retrieval. IP&M 57, 6
(2020), 102288.
[30] Andrew Drozdov, Nathanael Schärli, Ekin Akyürek, Nathan Scales, Xinying
Song, Xinyun Chen, Olivier Bousquet, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Compositional
semantic parsing with large language models. In ICLR.
[31] Wenqi Fan, Tyler Derr, Xiangyu Zhao, Yao Ma, Hui Liu, Jianping Wang, Jiliang
Tang, and Qing Li. 2021. Attacking black-box recommendations via copying
cross-domain user profiles. In ICDE. 1583–1594.
[32] Wenqi Fan, Yujuan Ding, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei Yin,
Tat-Seng Chua, and Qing Li. 2024. A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards
Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models. arXiv:2405.06211 (2024).
[33] Wenqi Fan, Xiaorui Liu, Wei Jin, Xiangyu Zhao, Jiliang Tang, and Qing Li. 2022.
Graph Trend Filtering Networks for Recommendation. In SIGIR. 112–121.
[34] Wenqi Fan, Yao Ma, Qing Li, Yuan He, Eric Zhao, Jiliang Tang, and Dawei Yin.
2019. Graph neural networks for social recommendation. In WWW. 417–426.
[35] Wenqi Fan, Yao Ma, Qing Li, Jianping Wang, Guoyong Cai, Jiliang Tang, and
Dawei Yin. 2020. A graph neural network framework for social recommenda-
tions. TKDE (2020).
[36] Wenqi Fan, Xiangyu Zhao, Xiao Chen, Jingran Su, Jingtong Gao, Lin Wang,
Qidong Liu, Yiqi Wang, Han Xu, Lei Chen, et al. 2022. A Comprehensive Survey
on Trustworthy Recommender Systems. arXiv:2209.10117 (2022).
[37] Wenqi Fan, Zihuai Zhao, Jiatong Li, Yunqing Liu, Xiaowei Mei, Yiqi Wang,
Jiliang Tang, and Qing Li. 2023. Recommender systems in the era of large
language models (llms). arXiv:2307.02046 (2023).
[38] Thibault Févry, Livio Baldini Soares, Nicholas FitzGerald, Eunsol Choi, and Tom
Kwiatkowski. 2020. Entities as Experts: Sparse Memory Access with Entity
Supervision. In EMNLP. 4937–4951.
[39] Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai,
Jiawei Sun, and Haofen Wang. 2023. Retrieval-augmented generation for large
language models: A survey. arXiv:2312.10997 (2023).
[40] Izacard Gautier, Caron Mathilde, Hosseini Lucas, Riedel Sebastian, Bojanowski
Piotr, Joulin Armand, and Grave Edouard. 2022. Unsupervised dense information
retrieval with contrastive learning. J Mach Learn Res (2022).
[41] Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng
Gao, Wen-tau Yih, and Michel Galley. 2018. A knowledge-grounded neural
conversation model. In AAAI, Vol. 32.
[42] Michael R. Glass, Gaetano Rossiello, Md. Faisal Mahbub Chowdhury, Ankita
Naik, Pengshan Cai, and Alfio Gliozzo. 2022. Re2G: Retrieve, Rerank, Generate.
In NAACL-HLT. 2701–2715.
[43] Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Nicolas Usunier. 2017. Improving Neural
Language Models with a Continuous Cache. In ICLR.
[44] Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang.
2020. Retrieval augmented language model pre-training. In ICML. 3929–3938.
[45] Junxian He, Graham Neubig, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. 2021. Efficient Near-
est Neighbor Language Models. In EMNLP (1). 5703–5714.
[46] Zhenyu He, Zexuan Zhong, Tianle Cai, Jason D Lee, and Di He. 2023. Rest:
Retrieval-based speculative decoding. arXiv:2311.08252 (2023).
[47] Ziniu Hu, Ahmet Iscen, Chen Sun, Zirui Wang, Kai-Wei Chang, Yizhou Sun,
Cordelia Schmid, David A Ross, and Alireza Fathi. 2023. Reveal: Retrieval-
augmented visual-language pre-training with multi-source multimodal knowl-
edge memory. In CVPR. 23369–23379.
[48] Jie Huang, Wei Ping, Peng Xu, Mohammad Shoeybi, Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang,
and Bryan Catanzaro. 2023. Raven: In-context learning with retrieval augmented
encoder-decoder language models. arXiv:2308.07922 (2023).
[49] Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021. Distilling Knowledge from Reader to
Retriever for Question Answering. In ICLR.
[50] Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021. Leveraging Passage Retrieval with
Generative Models for Open Domain Question Answering. In EACL. 874–880.
[51] Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni,
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard
Grave. 2023. Atlas: Few-shot Learning with Retrieval Augmented Language
Models. J Mach Learn Res 24, 251 (2023), 1–43.
[52] Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-
Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Active Retrieval
Augmented Generation. In EMNLP. 7969–7992.
[53] Anubha Kabra, Emmy Liu, Simran Khanuja, Alham Fikri Aji, Genta Winata,
Samuel Cahyawijaya, Anuoluwapo Aremu, Perez Ogayo, and Graham Neubig.
2023. Multi-lingual and Multi-cultural Figurative Language Understanding. In
ACL.
[54]
Minki Kang, Jin Myung Kwak, Jinheon Baek, and Sung Ju Hwang. 2023. Knowl-
edge graph-augmented language models for knowledge-grounded dialogue
generation. arXiv:2305.18846 (2023).
6499
KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain Wenqi Fan et al.
[55] Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ledell Wu,
Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense Passage Retrieval
for Open-Domain Question Answering. In EMNLP. 6769–6781.
[56] Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike
Lewis. 2020. Generalization through Memorization: Nearest Neighbor Language
Models. In ICLR.
[57] Omar Khattab, Keshav Santhanam, Xiang Lisa Li, David Hall, Percy Liang,
Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia. 2022. Demonstrate-search-predict:
Composing retrieval and language models for knowledge-intensive nlp.
arXiv:2212.14024 (2022).
[58] Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. 2020. Colbert: Efficient and effective passage
search via contextualized late interaction over bert. In SIGIR. 39–48.
[59] Gangwoo Kim, Sungdong Kim, Byeongguk Jeon, Joonsuk Park, and Jaewoo
Kang. 2023. Tree of Clarifications: Answering Ambiguous Questions with
Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models. In EMNLP.
[60] Mei Kobayashi and Koichi Takeda. 2000. Information retrieval on the web.CSUR
32, 2 (2000), 144–173.
[61] Mojtaba Komeili, Kurt Shuster, and Jason Weston. 2022. Internet-Augmented
Dialogue Generation. In ACL. 8460–8478.
[62] Tian Lan, Deng Cai, Yan Wang, Heyan Huang, and Xian-Ling Mao. 2022. Copy
is All You Need. In ICLR.
[63] Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. 2023. Fast inference from
transformers via speculative decoding. In ICML. 19274–19286.
[64] Mike Lewis, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Gargi Ghosh, Armen Aghajanyan, Sida
Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. Pre-training via paraphrasing. In NeurIPS.
[65] Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman
Mohamed, Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. BART:
Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language Generation,
Translation, and Comprehension. In ACL. 7871–7880.
[66] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir
Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-
täschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive
nlp tasks. In NeurIPS. 9459–9474.
[67] Hongxin Li, Jingran Su, Yuntao Chen, Qing Li, and ZHAO-XIANG ZHANG.
2024. SheetCopilot: Bringing Software Productivity to the Next Level through
Large Language Models. In NeurIPS.
[68] Jiatong Li, Yunqing Liu, Wenqi Fan, Xiao-Yong Wei, Hui Liu, Jiliang Tang, and
Qing Li. 2023. Empowering Molecule Discovery for Molecule-Caption Transla-
tion with Large Language Models: A ChatGPT Perspective. arXiv:2306.06615
(2023).
[69] Xiang Li, Zhenyu Li, Chen Shi, Yong Xu, Qing Du, Mingkui Tan, Jun Huang,
and Wei Lin. 2024. AlphaFin: Benchmarking Financial Analysis with Retrieval-
Augmented Stock-Chain Framework. arXiv:2403.12582 (2024).
[70] Xinze Li, Zhenghao Liu, Chenyan Xiong, Shi Yu, Yu Gu, Zhiyuan Liu, and Ge Yu.
2023. Structure-Aware Language Model Pretraining Improves Dense Retrieval
on Structured Data. In ACL.
[71] Xiaoqian Li, Ercong Nie, and Sheng Liang. 2023. From Classification to Gen-
eration: Insights into Crosslingual Retrieval Augmented ICL. In NeurIPS 2023
Workshop on Instruction Tuning and Instruction Following.
[72] Xiaonan Li and Xipeng Qiu. 2023. MoT: Memory-of-Thought Enables ChatGPT
to Self-Improve. In EMNLP. 6354–6374.
[73] Zonglin Li, Ruiqi Guo, and Sanjiv Kumar. 2022. Decoupled context processing
for context augmented language modeling. In NeurIPS. 21698–21710.
[74] Demiao Lin. 2024. Revolutionizing Retrieval-Augmented Generation with En-
hanced PDF Structure Recognition. arXiv:2401.12599 (2024).
[75] Xi Victoria Lin, Xilun Chen, Mingda Chen, Weijia Shi, Maria Lomeli, Richard
James, Pedro Rodriguez, Jacob Kahn, Gergely Szilvasy, Mike Lewis, et al. 2023.
RA-DIT: Retrieval-Augmented Dual Instruction Tuning. In ICLR.
[76] Haochen Liu, Jamell Dacon, Wenqi Fan, Hui Liu, Zitao Liu, and Jiliang Tang.
2020. Does Gender Matter? Towards Fairness in Dialogue Systems. In ACL.
[77] Haochen Liu, Yiqi Wang, Wenqi Fan, Xiaorui Liu, Yaxin Li, Shaili Jain, Yunhao
Liu, Anil K Jain, and Jiliang Tang. 2021. Trustworthy ai: A computational
perspective. arXiv:2107.06641 (2021).
[78] Shengchao Liu, Weili Nie, Chengpeng Wang, Jiarui Lu, Zhuoran Qiao, Ling Liu,
Jian Tang, Chaowei Xiao, and Animashree Anandkumar. 2023. Multi-modal
molecule structure–text model for text-based retrieval and editing. Nature
Machine Intelligence 5, 12 (2023), 1447–1457.
[79] Ye Liu, Semih Yavuz, Rui Meng, Dragomir Radev, Caiming Xiong, and Yingbo
Zhou. 2022. Uni-Parser: Unified Semantic Parser for Question Answering on
Knowledge Base and Database. In EMNLP. 8858–8869.
[80] Alejandro Lozano, Scott L Fleming, Chia-Chun Chiang, and Nigam Shah. 2023.
Clinfo. ai: An open-source retrieval-augmented large language model system for
answering medical questions using scientific literature. In PACIFIC SYMPOSIUM
ON BIOCOMPUTING 2024. 8–23.
[81] Pan Lu, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu, Tanmay
Rajpurohit, Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. 2023. Dynamic Prompt Learning
via Policy Gradient for Semi-structured Mathematical Reasoning. In ICLR.
[82] Yu Lu, Junwei Bao, Yan Song, Zichen Ma, Shuguang Cui, Youzheng Wu, and
Xiaodong He. 2021. RevCore: Review-Augmented Conversational Recommen-
dation. In ACL/IJCNLP (Findings). 1161–1173.
[83] Man Luo, Xin Xu, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Mehran Kazemi, Chitta Baral,
Vaiva Imbrasaite, and Vincent Y Zhao. 2023. Dr. icl: Demonstration-retrieved
in-context learning. arXiv:2305.14128 (2023).
[84] Chang Ma, Haiteng Zhao, Lin Zheng, Jiayi Xin, Qintong Li, Lijun Wu, Zhi-
hong Deng, Yang Lu, Qi Liu, and Lingpeng Kong. 2023. Retrieved Sequence
Augmentation for Protein Representation Learning. bioRxiv (2023), 2023–02.
[85] Xinbei Ma, Yeyun Gong, Pengcheng He, Hai Zhao, and Nan Duan. 2023. Query
rewriting for retrieval-augmented large language models. arXiv:2305.14283
(2023).
[86] Aristides Milios, Siva Reddy, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. 2023. In-context learning
for text classification with many labels. In Proceedings of the 1st GenBench
Workshop on (Benchmarking) Generalisation in NLP. 173–184.
[87] Sewon Min, Julian Michael, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020.
AmbigQA: Answering Ambiguous Open-domain Questions. In EMNLP.
[88] Sewon Min, Weijia Shi, Mike Lewis, Xilun Chen, Wen-tau Yih, Hannaneh Ha-
jishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2023. Nonparametric Masked Language Model-
ing. In ACL (Findings). 2097–2118.
[89] Noor Nashid, Mifta Sintaha, and Ali Mesbah. 2023. Retrieval-based prompt
selection for code-related few-shot learning. In ICSE. 2450–2462.
[90] Neil O’Hare, Paloma De Juan, Rossano Schifanella, Yunlong He, Dawei Yin, and
Yi Chang. 2016. Leveraging user interaction signals for web image search. In
SIGIR. 559–568.
[91] Md. Rizwan Parvez, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray,
and Kai-Wei Chang. 2021. Retrieval Augmented Code Generation and Summa-
rization. In EMNLP (Findings). 2719–2734.
[92] Fabio Petroni, Patrick S. H. Lewis, Aleksandra Piktus, Tim Rocktäschel, Yuxiang
Wu, Alexander H. Miller, and Sebastian Riedel. 2020. How Context Affects
Language Models’ Factual Predictions. InAKBC.
[93] Gabriel Poesia, Alex Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher
Meek, and Sumit Gulwani. 2022. Synchromesh: Reliable Code Generation from
Pre-trained Language Models. In ICLR.
[94] Anupam Purwar and Rahul Sundar. 2023. Keyword Augmented Retrieval:
Novel framework for Information Retrieval integrated with speech interface.
arXiv:2310.04205 (2023).
[95] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sand-
hini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al.
2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision.
In ICML. 8748–8763.
[96] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya
Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.
OpenAI blog 1, 8 (2019), 9.
[97] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang,
Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. J Mach Learn Res
21, 140 (2020), 1–67.
[98] Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon Shashua, Kevin
Leyton-Brown, and Yoav Shoham. 2023. In-context retrieval-augmented lan-
guage models. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 11 (2023), 1316–1331.
[99] Ori Ram, Gal Shachaf, Omer Levy, Jonathan Berant, and Amir Globerson. 2022.
Learning to Retrieve Passages without Supervision. InNAACL-HLT. 2687–2700.
[100] Parikshit Ram and Alexander G Gray. 2012. Maximum inner-product search
using cone trees. In KDD. 931–939.
[101] Juan Ramos et al. 2003. Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document
queries. In Proceedings of the first instructional conference on machine learning,
Vol. 242. Citeseer, 29–48.
[102] Rita Ramos, Bruno Martins, Desmond Elliott, and Yova Kementchedjhieva. 2023.
Smallcap: lightweight image captioning prompted with retrieval augmentation.
In CVPR. 2840–2849.
[103] Benjamin Z. Reichman and Larry Heck. 2024. Retrieval-Augmented Genera-
tion: Is Dense Passage Retrieval Retrieving? https://arxiv.org/html/2402.11035v1
(2024).
[104] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings
using Siamese BERT-Networks. In EMNLP-IJCNLP. 3982–3992.
[105] Yubing Ren, Yanan Cao, Ping Guo, Fang Fang, Wei Ma, and Zheng Lin. 2023.
Retrieve-and-sample: Document-level event argument extraction via hybrid
retrieval augmentation. In ACL. 293–306.
[106] Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al . 2009. The probabilistic relevance
framework: BM25 and beyond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval
3, 4 (2009), 333–389.
[107] Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant. 2022. Learning To Retrieve
Prompts for In-Context Learning. In NAACL-HLT. 2655–2671.
[108] Sara Sarto, Marcella Cornia, Lorenzo Baraldi, and Rita Cucchiara. 2022. Retrieval-
augmented transformer for image captioning. In CBMI. 1–7.
[109] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli,
Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2024.
Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In NeurIPS.
6500
A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models KDD ’24, August 25–29, 2024, Barcelona, Spain
[110] Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Minlie Huang, Nan Duan, Weizhu Chen, et al .
2023. Enhancing Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models with Iterative
Retrieval-Generation Synergy. In EMNLP.
[111] Fumin Shen, Wei Liu, Shaoting Zhang, Yang Yang, and Heng Tao Shen. 2015.
Learning binary codes for maximum inner product search. In ICCV. 4148–4156.
[112] Shelly Sheynin, Oron Ashual, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Oran Gafni, Eliya
Nachmani, and Yaniv Taigman. 2023. kNN-Diffusion: Image Generation via
Large-Scale Retrieval. In ICLR.
[113] Peng Shi, Rui Zhang, He Bai, and Jimmy Lin. 2022. XRICL: Cross-lingual
Retrieval-Augmented In-Context Learning for Cross-lingual Text-to-SQL Se-
mantic Parsing. In EMNLP (Findings). 5248–5259.
[114] Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Michihiro Yasunaga, Minjoon Seo, Rich James, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Wen-tau Yih. 2023. Replug: Retrieval-augmented
black-box language models. arXiv:2301.12652 (2023).
[115] Guy Shtar. 2021. Multimodal machine learning for drug knowledge discovery.
In WSDM. 1115–1116.
[116] Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2021.
Retrieval Augmentation Reduces Hallucination in Conversation. In EMNLP
(Findings). 3784–3803.
[117] Suzanna Sia and Kevin Duh. 2023. In-context learning as maintaining co-
herency: A study of on-the-fly machine translation using large language models.
arXiv:2305.03573 (2023).
[118] Amit Singhal et al. 2001. Modern information retrieval: A brief overview. IEEE
Data Eng. Bull. 24, 4 (2001), 35–43.
[119] Shamane Siriwardhana, Rivindu Weerasekera, Elliott Wen, Tharindu Kalu-
arachchi, Rajib Rana, and Suranga Nanayakkara. 2023. Improving the domain
adaptation of retrieval augmented generation (RAG) models for open domain
question answering. TACL 11 (2023), 1–17.
[120] Mingyang Song, Yi Feng, and Liping Jing. 2023. Hisum: Hyperbolic interaction
model for extractive multi-document summarization. In WWW. 1427–1436.
[121] Karen Sparck Jones. 1972. A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its
application in retrieval. Journal of documentation 28, 1 (1972), 11–21.
[122] Ziteng Sun, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Jae Hun Ro, Ahmad Beirami, Himanshu
Jain, and Felix Yu. 2024. Spectr: Fast speculative decoding via optimal transport.
In NeurIPS.
[123] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi,
Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
arXiv:2307.09288 (2023).
[124] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal.
2023. Interleaving Retrieval with Chain-of-Thought Reasoning for Knowledge-
Intensive Multi-Step Questions. In ACL.
[125] Ante Wang, Linfeng Song, Qi Liu, Haitao Mi, Longyue Wang, Zhaopeng Tu,
Jinsong Su, and Dong Yu. 2023. Search-engine-augmented dialogue response
generation with cheaply supervised query production. Artificial Intelligence 319
(2023), 103874.
[126] Boxin Wang, Wei Ping, Peng Xu, Lawrence McAfee, Zihan Liu, Mohammad
Shoeybi, Yi Dong, Oleksii Kuchaiev, Bo Li, Chaowei Xiao, et al. 2023. Shall We
Pretrain Autoregressive Language Models with Retrieval? A Comprehensive
Study. In EMNLP. 7763–7786.
[127] Hanbing Wang, Xiaorui Liu, Wenqi Fan, Xiangyu Zhao, Venkataramana Kini,
Devendra Yadav, Fei Wang, Zhen Wen, Jiliang Tang, and Hui Liu. 2024. Re-
thinking Large Language Model Architectures for Sequential Recommendations.
arXiv:2402.09543 (2024).
[128] Liang Wang, Nan Yang, and Furu Wei. 2024. Learning to Retrieve In-Context
Examples for Large Language Models. In EACL. 1752–1767.
[129] Xintao Wang, Qianwen Yang, Yongting Qiu, Jiaqing Liang, Qianyu He,
Zhouhong Gu, Yanghua Xiao, and Wei Wang. 2023. Knowledgpt: Enhanc-
ing large language models with retrieval and storage access on knowledge bases.
arXiv:2308.11761 (2023).
[130] Yile Wang, Peng Li, Maosong Sun, and Yang Liu. 2023. Self-Knowledge Guided
Retrieval Augmentation for Large Language Models. In EMNLP.
[131] Zichao Wang, Weili Nie, Zhuoran Qiao, Chaowei Xiao, Richard G. Baraniuk, and
Anima Anandkumar. 2023. Retrieval-based Controllable Molecule Generation.
In ICLR.
[132] Zifeng Wang, Zichen Wang, Balasubramaniam Srinivasan, Vassilis N Ioannidis,
Huzefa Rangwala, and Rishita Anubhai. 2023. BioBridge: Bridging Biomedical
Foundation Models via Knowledge Graph. arXiv:2310.03320 (2023).
[133]
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi,
Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits rea-
soning in large language models. In NeurIPS. 24824–24837.
[134] Junda Wu, Cheng-Chun Chang, Tong Yu, Zhankui He, Jianing Wang, Yupeng
Hou, and Julian McAuley. 2024. CoRAL: Collaborative Retrieval-Augmented
Large Language Models Improve Long-tail Recommendation. arXiv:2403.06447
(2024).
[135] Ledell Wu, Fabio Petroni, Martin Josifoski, Sebastian Riedel, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2020. Scalable Zero-shot Entity Linking with Dense Entity Retrieval. In
EMNLP. 6397–6407.
[136] Yuhuai Wu, Markus Norman Rabe, DeLesley Hutchins, and Christian Szegedy.
2022. Memorizing Transformers. In ICLR.
[137] Fangyuan Xu, Weijia Shi, and Eunsol Choi. 2023. RECOMP: Improving retrieval-
augmented LMs with context compression and selective augmentation. InICLR.
[138] Jitao Xu, Josep-Maria Crego, and Jean Senellart. 2020. Boosting neural machine
translation with similar translations. In ACL. 1570–1579.
[139] Jing Xu, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2022. Beyond Goldfish Memory:
Long-Term Open-Domain Conversation. In ACL (1). 5180–5197.
[140] Ling Yang, Zhilin Huang, Xiangxin Zhou, Minkai Xu, Wentao Zhang, Yu Wang,
Xiawu Zheng, Wenming Yang, Ron O Dror, Shenda Hong, et al. 2023. Prompt-
based 3d molecular diffusion models for structure-based drug design. (2023).
[141] Jiacheng Ye, Zhiyong Wu, Jiangtao Feng, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. 2023.
Compositional exemplars for in-context learning. In ICML. 39818–39833.
[142] Yunhu Ye, Binyuan Hui, Min Yang, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023.
Large Language Models are Versatile Decomposers: Decomposing Evidence and
Questions for Table-based Reasoning. In SIGIR. 174–184.
[143] Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Yao You, Jan Milczek, Sebastian Laverde, and Leah Li.
2024. Financial Report Chunking for Effective Retrieval Augmented Generation.
arXiv:2402.05131 (2024).
[144] Dawei Yin, Yuening Hu, Jiliang Tang, Tim Daly, Mianwei Zhou, Hua Ouyang,
Jianhui Chen, Changsung Kang, Hongbo Deng, Chikashi Nobata, et al . 2016.
Ranking relevance in yahoo search. In KDD. 323–332.
[145] Dani Yogatama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, and Lingpeng Kong. 2021. Adap-
tive semiparametric language models. TACL 9 (2021), 362–373.
[146] Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. 2023. Making
Retrieval-Augmented Language Models Robust to Irrelevant Context. In ICLR.
[147] Wenhao Yu, Dan Iter, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu, Mingxuan Ju, Soumya
Sanyal, Chenguang Zhu, Michael Zeng, and Meng Jiang. 2023. Generate rather
than Retrieve: Large Language Models are Strong Context Generators. In ICLR.
[148] Wenhao Yu, Zhihan Zhang, Zhenwen Liang, Meng Jiang, and Ashish Sabhar-
wal. 2023. Improving language models via plug-and-play retrieval feedback.
arXiv:2305.14002 (2023).
[149] Zichun Yu, Chenyan Xiong, Shi Yu, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2023. Augmentation-
Adapted Retriever Improves Generalization of Language Models as Generic
Plug-In. In ACL. 2421–2436.
[150] Shenglai Zeng, Jiankun Zhang, Pengfei He, Yue Xing, Yiding Liu, Han Xu,
Jie Ren, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, Yi Chang, et al . 2024. The Good and
The Bad: Exploring Privacy Issues in Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG).
arXiv:2402.16893 (2024).
[151] Boyu Zhang, Hongyang Yang, Tianyu Zhou, Muhammad Ali Babar, and Xiao-
Yang Liu. 2023. Enhancing financial sentiment analysis via retrieval augmented
large language models. InCM International Conference on AI in Finance. 349–356.
[152] Houyu Zhang, Zhenghao Liu, Chenyan Xiong, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2020. Grounded
Conversation Generation as Guided Traverses in Commonsense Knowledge
Graphs. In ACL. 2031–2043.
[153] Jiahao Zhang, Rui Xue, Wenqi Fan, Xin Xu, Qing Li, Jian Pei, and Xiaorui Liu.
2024. Linear-Time Graph Neural Networks for Scalable Recommendations.
arXiv:2402.13973 (2024).
[154] Yunxiang Zhang, Muhammad Khalifa, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Moontae Lee,
Honglak Lee, and Lu Wang. 2023. Merging generated and retrieved knowledge
for open-domain QA. arXiv:2310.14393 (2023).
[155] Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhengren Wang, Yunteng Geng,
Fangcheng Fu, Ling Yang, Wentao Zhang, and Bin Cui. 2024. Retrieval-
Augmented Generation for AI-Generated Content: A Survey. arXiv:2402.19473
(2024).
[156] Ruochen Zhao, Hailin Chen, Weishi Wang, Fangkai Jiao, Xuan Long Do,
Chengwei Qin, Bosheng Ding, Xiaobao Guo, Minzhi Li, Xingxuan Li, et al .
2023. Retrieving multimodal information for augmented generation: A survey.
arXiv:2303.10868 (2023).
[157] Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou,
Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. 2023. A survey
of large language models. arXiv:2303.18223 (2023).
[158] Zihuai Zhao, Wenqi Fan, Jiatong Li, Yunqing Liu, Xiaowei Mei, Yiqi Wang, Zhen
Wen, Fei Wang, Xiangyu Zhao, Jiliang Tang, et al. 2024. Recommender systems
in the era of large language models (llms). TKDE (2024).
[159] Zexuan Zhong, Tao Lei, and Danqi Chen. 2022. Training Language Models with
Memory Augmentation. In EMNLP.
[160] Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Frank F Xu, Zhengbao Jiang, and Graham Neubig. 2022.
Docprompting: Generating code by retrieving the docs. In ICLR.
[161] Yinghao Zhu, Changyu Ren, Shiyun Xie, Shukai Liu, Hangyuan Ji, Zixiang
Wang, Tao Sun, Long He, Zhoujun Li, Xi Zhu, et al. 2024. REALM: RAG-Driven
Enhancement of Multimodal Electronic Health Records Analysis via Large
Language Models. arXiv:2402.07016 (2024).
[162] Wei Zou, Runpeng Geng, Binghui Wang, and Jinyuan Jia. 2024. PoisonedRAG:
Knowledge Poisoning Attacks to Retrieval-Augmented Generation of Large
Language Models. arXiv:2402.07867 (2024).
6501