Aggregation-I nduced Emission
Aggregation-Induced Emission:N ew Vistas at the
Aggregate Level
Zheng Zhao+,H aoke Zhang+,J acky W. Y. Lam, and Ben Zhong Tang*
Angewandte
Chemie
Keywords:
aggregates ·
aggregation-induced emission -
(AIE) ·luminescence ·
meso science ·
molecular science
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
How to cite: Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
International Edition: doi.org/10.1002/anie.201916729
German Edition: doi.org/10.1002/ange.201916729
9888 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
1. Introduction
Throughout the history of scientific exploration by
humanity,a commonly accepted research philosophy is to
observe the phenomenon and summarize the rules from the
macroscale,t hen go to study the mechanism at the microscale,
and finally reach ac omplete understanding.[1] This kind of
research philosophy dominates research in physics,c hemistry,
biology,a nd material science,a nd has made great contribu-
tions to the advancement of modern natural science.[2] The
study of luminescence and luminescent materials also obeys
this philosophy and can be traced back to 16th century when
aS panish physician called Nicolas Monardes first reported
that an infusion of aM exican wood with blue emission
(Figure 1a ,b) could be used to treat kidney and urinary
diseases.[3] This identification of an effective drug through its
emission color can be considered as the first application of
fluorescence.T he most famous lumi-
nescent material in ancient reports is
the so-called “Bologna stone” discov-
ered by Vincenzo Cascariolo in 1602,
which attracted the attention of Gali-
leo Galilei.[4a] As he commented “It
must be explained how it happens that the light is conceived
into the stone,a nd is given backa fter some time,a si n
childbirth”. Another representative luminescent matter is
named “Durham fluor” discovered by Edward D. Clarke in
Cambridge in 1819, the crystal of which was perfectly
transparent and showed dichroic behavior:t he color dis-
played by reflected light was deep sapphire blue,w hereas that
displayed by transmitted light was intense emerald green
(Figure 1c ,d).[4b] Generally speaking, before the beginning of
19th century,m any scientists observed the magic luminescent
phenomenon and great scientists such as Galileo,B oyle,
Newton and Stokes all tried to explain it. Unfortunately,d ue
to the limited understanding in photophysics,t he lumines-
cence phenomenon was not well understood at that time.[3c]
After over three centuries of continuous research on
luminescence phenomena and luminescent materials,e spe-
cially at the molecular level, gradually ad eeper understand-
ing of the mechanism of luminescence has been achieved and
researchers have come to realize that the light of luminescent
Aggregation-induced emission (AIE) describes ap hotophysical
phenomenon in whichm olecular aggregates exhibit stronger emission
than the single molecules.O ver the course of the last 20 years,A IE
researchh as made great strides in material development, mechanistic
study and high-tech applications.T he achievements of AIE research
demonstrate that molecular aggregates showm any properties and
functions that are absent in molecular species.I nt his review,w e
summarize the advances in the field of AIE and its related areas.W e
specifically focus on the new properties of materials attained by
molecular aggregates beyond the microscopic molecular level. We
hope this review will inspire more researchi nto molecular ensembles
at and beyond the meso level and lead to the significant progress in
material and biological science.
From the Contents
1. Introduction 9889
2. AIE and the Research Branches 9891
3. New Advancements of AIE 9903
4. Summary and Outlook 9904
Figure 1. Absorption and fluorescence colors of infusions of L. neph-
riticum in a) daylight and b) mildly alkaline aqueouss olution to which
chips of Eysenhardtia polystachia (kindly provided by Dr.A .U .A cuÇa)
were added. Twinned crystals of green fluorite (from Rogerley,W ear-
dale, County Durham, England) illuminated with c) sunlight and d) a
UV lamp. Adapted from Ref. [3d] with permission.C opyrightA merican
Chemical Society.
[*] Dr.Z .Z hao,[+] Dr.H .Z hang,[+] Dr.J .W .Y .L am, Prof. B. Z. Tang
Department of Chemistry
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
Institute for Advanced Study
Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center
for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay,K owloon,H ong Kong 999077 (China)
and
HKUST-Shenzhen Research Institute
No. 9Y uexing 1st Rd, South Area, Hi-tech Park
Nanshan, Shenzhen 518057 (China)
E-mail:t angbenz@ust.hk
Prof. B. Z. Tang
Center for Aggregation-Induced Emission
State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices
SCUT-HKUST Joint Research Institute
South China University of Technology
Tianhe Qu, Guangzhou 510640 (China)
[++]T hese authors contributed equally to this work.
Supportingi nformation and the ORCID identification number(s) for
the author(s) of this article can be found under:
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201916729.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9889Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
materials arises from the deactivation of the excited states of
the luminescent molecules that absorb light energy.[5] Based
on this understanding,g reat achievements have been made in
this area and one of the biggest achievements was the
demonstration of the Jablonski diagram in 1933.[6] From the
Jablonski diagram, one can visualize the possible processes
that al ight-irradiated molecule undergoes,i ncluding photon
absorption, vibrational relaxation, internal conversion, fluo-
rescence,i ntersystem crossing (ISC), phosphorescence and
delayed fluorescence (Figure 2). This description of lumines-
cence at the molecular level greatly enhanced peopleQs
understanding of this phenomenon and provided ag uide for
the development luminescence science.
Ther esearch of molecular luminescence suggests that
as ingle molecule is the basic unit for the occurrence of
luminescence,w hile the structure of the molecule determines
its luminescence properties.B yf urther extension of this idea,
one may easily conclude that the properties of microscopic
molecules should be also present in their macroscopic
materials.I ndeed, this idea works well in many cases.F or
example,a glucose molecule is sweet and its aggregate is also
sweet. Similarly,a single polymeric polyethylene molecule is
insulating as is its macroscopic form, that is,p olyethylene
plastic.T his philosophy and approach of molecular science
guides the design of luminescent materials and many other
functional materials.A nd under the guidance of this principle,
the rational design of molecular structures and the elucidation
of the structure–property relationships have become the key
questions of material science.H owever,d oes material per-
formance mainly depend on the molecular structure?I si t
possible that the properties of materials or molecular
aggregates will be different from that of single molecules?
Thea nswer is definitely yes.I ndeed, an inconsistency between
molecular behavior and material performance has been
observed in luminescent materials.F or instance,t raditional
luminophores with planar and strong intermolecular inter-
actions generally show bright emission in the mono-dispersed
state but weakened or even quenched emission in the
aggregated state.T his phenomenon is known as aggrega-
tion-caused quenching (ACQ) (Figure 3a ).[7] More interest-
ingly,s ome propeller-shaped molecules show no emission in
their dilute solutions (single molecular state) but much
enhanced emission in their molecular ensembles.T his effect
is known as aggregation-induced emission (AIE, Fig-
Dr.Z heng Zhao received his Ph.D. in 2014
from Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemis-
try (SIOC), Chinese Academy of Science
under the supervision of Prof. Xike Gao and
Prof. Daoben Zhu. After as hort stay in
SIOC to work as ar esearch assistant, he
became ap ost-doctoral fellow at The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology
(HKUST) under the supervision of Prof. Ben
Zhong Tang (2015–2020). His research
focuses on synthesis, mechanism, and appli-
cation of new luminescentm aterials.
Dr.H aoke Zhang received his Ph.D. from
HKUST in 2018 under the supervision of
Prof. Ben Zhong Tang. He is currently
ap ost-doctoral fellow at HKUST.H is
research interests focus on chiral chemistry,
photophysical chemistry,a nd computational
chemistry.
Dr.J acky W. Y. Lam received his Ph.D. from
HKUST in 2003 under the supervision of
Prof. Ben Zhong Tang. He is currently
ar esearch associate professor in the Depart-
ment of Chemistry at HKUST. His research
interests include macromolecular chemistry
and materials science. He has been listed by
Thomson Reuters and Clarivate Analytics as
aH ighly Cited Researcheri nt he area of
Chemistry in 2014–2018.
Professor Ben Zhong Tang received his bach-
elor and Ph.D. from South China University
and Technology and Kyoto University in
1982 and 1988, respectively.H ec onducted
his postdoctoral work at University of Tor-
onto in 1989–1994. He joined HKUST in
1994 and was promoted to Chair Professor
in 2008 and Stephen K. C. Cheong Professor
of Science in 2013. He was elected to
Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009. His
research interests include the exploration of
new advancedm aterials, new luminescent
processes and new polymerizationr eactions.
He is serving as Editor-in-Chief of Materials
Chemistry Frontiers (RSC).
Figure 2. Jablonski diagram.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9890 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ure 3b ).[8] These results indicate that molecular ensembles
can show totally different properties from isolated molecules.
In material science,t his means that it is also worthwhile
paying attention to what happens in the aggregated state as
well to caring about the characteristics of the single molecules.
Unfortunately,f ew people have systematically studied molec-
ular ensembles at or beyond the meso scale although it is still
an unexplored land offering huge opportunities.
In this regard, AIE research provides an excellent plat-
form to explore the behavior of molecular aggregates since it
emphasizes the new properties achieved by molecular aggre-
gates beyond the microscopic molecular level.[9] During the
last 20 years,A IE research has made great advances in
material development, mechanistic study,a nd high-tech
applications.T hese achievements demonstrate that many
behaviors and functions that are absent in molecular species
can be found in molecular aggregates.A dditionally,s ince the
properties of molecular ensembles are closer to those of
macroscopic materials,A IE research is thus of both scientific
value and technological importance for real applications.
In this review,w es ummarize the key breakthroughs of
AIE research, focusing mainly on the new branches that have
developed (Figure 4). In particular,w ep resent the new
properties that molecular ensembles bring to molecules and
highlight the role of molecular aggregates in improving the
performance of organic functional materials.T he branches of
AIE include crystallization-induced emission (CIE),[10a]
room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP),[10b] aggregation-
induced delayed fluorescence (AIDF),[10c] anti-Kasha transi-
tion (AKT),[10d] clusterization-triggered emission (CTE),[9e]
through-space interaction (TSI),[10e] mechanoluminescence
(ML),[10f] circularly polarized luminescence (CPL),[10g] aggre-
gation-induced generation of reactive oxygen species (AIG-
ROS),[10h] photothermal/photoacoustic (PT/PA),[10i] and solid-
state molecular motion (SSMM).[10i,j] In addition, some of the
latest advancements of AIE research will also be introduced
in the Supporting Information. We hope this review will offer
valuable insight and can also inspire research into molecular
ensembles at/beyond the meso-scale level that leads to
significant progress in material and biological science.
2. AIE and the Research Branches
2.1. Aggregation-Induced Emission (AIE)
AIE describes the behavior of am olecule which shows
dim or no emission in dilute solution but much enhanced
emission in aggregates or in the solid state.[8] To some extent,
the phenomenon of AIE is not new: Sir George Gabriel
Stokes had described as imilar phenomenon in 1853 when he
studied the luminescent properties of some inorganic salts.[11]
However,l ittle attention was paid to the significance of the
observations and the potential of this kind of materials for
practical applications until 2001, when Tang and co-workers
investigated the luminescence behavior of rotor-rich methyl-
pentaphenylsilole,t hey re-discovered this phenomenon and
proposed the concept of AIE.[8] After the systematic inves-
tigation of the AIE phenomenon of different AIE systems,i n
2003, they realized that the active intramolecular motion of
AIE luminogens (AIEgens) in the excited state possibly
accelerates the non-radiative decay of the excitons to quench
their emission in the solution state.S uch an intramolecular
rotation is restricted in the aggregated state and this leads to
ar eduction of the non-radiative decay and an enhancement of
the luminescence.[12] They thus proposed the restriction of
intramolecular rotation (RIR) as the mechanism of AIE. To
rationally explain some new AIE systems without rotors,t hey
further proposed the restriction of intramolecular vibration
(RIV) as as upplementary of RIR since intramolecular
vibration can also result in non-radiative decay.[13] Overall,
RIR and RIV were combined under the new term restriction
of intramolecular motion (RIM) (Figure 5). TheR IM mech-
anism now has been widely accepted as the mechanism of
AIE and can be simply described as follows:I ns olution or in
Figure 3. Molecular structures and photographs of a) perylene and
b) hexaphenylsilole (HPS) solutionsw ith different poor solvent frac-
tions taken under ultraviolet light irradiation.A dapted from Ref. [9]
with permission.C opyright American ChemicalS ociety.
Figure 4. Research branches based on AIE. CIE:c rystallization-induced
emission;R TP:r oom-temperature phosphorescence;A IDF:a ggrega-
tion-induced delayed fluorescence;A KT: anti-Kashat ransition;C TE:
clusterization-triggerede mission; TSI:t hrough-space interaction;M L:
mechanoluminescence;C PL:c ircularly polarized luminescence;A IG-
ROS:a ggregation-induced generation of reactive oxygen species;P T/
PA:p hotothermal/photoacoustic phenomena;S SMM:s olid-state
molecularm otion.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9891Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the mono-dispersed state,t he active intramolecular motion
(including rotation and vibration) boosts the non-radiative
decay channels like conical intersections or dark decay
processes to quench the emission, while in the aggregated
state,t he non-radiative decay channels are blocked due to the
restriction of the intramolecular motion, leading to enhanced
emission.[14] Following the RIM mechanism, any manipula-
tion that can restrict the intramolecular motion of AIEgens
theoretically can lead to as tronger emission.[15] Theu nique
intramolecular motion-responsive luminescence of AIEgens
and their strong solid-state emission enable their extensive
applications in various fields including fluorescent imaging,
bio-probes,c hemical sensors,p hotonic drugs,a nd optoelec-
tronics.[9] Moreover,a ggregated molecular ensembles can
even display some new properties and functions that are not
found in their molecular species.T his thus opens new doors
for the development of luminescent materials and even the
whole area of material science.
2.2. Crystallization-Induced Emission (CIE)
Organic luminogens with strong solid-state emission are
important since many advanced optoelectronic devices such
as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic light-
emitting transistors (OLETs), and organic lasers work in the
form of thin films or crystals.[16] Moreover,c rystallization is
beneficial for charge transport of organic semiconducting
emitters and is thus favorable for producing OLETs and
organic lasers.[16b,c] However,f or traditional luminogens,
crystallization is notorious because the strong p–p interac-
tions in crystals usually shift the emission wavelength and lead
to aw eakening of the emission intensity.[17] Therefore,v arious
chemical modification and physical doping strategies have
been employed to avoid luminogenic crystallization. How-
ever,t hese in turn, lead to an increase in the cost and
complexity of the devices.[18] During our study of AIE
phenomena, we observed that some molecules showed no
emission in both solution and the amorphous solid state but
bright emission in their crystal state.W en amed this phenom-
enon crystallization-induced emission (CIE) (Figure 6a ).[10a]
Further investigations revealed that in crystals of CIE
molecules,t here are very few strong p–p interactions but
numerous other kinds of intermolecular interactions such as
hydrogen bonding,C @H···p interactions,o rh eteroatom–
heteroatom interactions.T hese interactions not only help
rigidify the molecular conformations but also avoid the
emission quenching through p–p interactions.[10a, 17, 19] Further-
more,u nlike traditional ACQm olecules that usually show
red-shifted emission and weakened emission in the crystal
state,C IE molecules generally show blue-shifted emission
and enhanced emission in their crystal form (Figure 6b ). Such
features potentially enable the luminogens to show both
strong emission and high charge mobility.[19, 20] Theoretical
calculations provided explanations for the CIE effect (Fig-
ure 6c ).[17a] Molecules with twisted and bulky structures are
Figure 5. a) Tetraphenylethene (TPE) is non-emissive when dissolved
but becomes emissive when aggregated due to the restriction of
intramolecular rotations (RIR). Adapted from Ref. [9a] with permission.
Copyright American Chemical Society.b )C yclooctatetrathiophene
(COTh) shows AIE activity due to the restriction of intramolecular
vibration (RIV) in the aggregated state. Adapted from Ref. [13b] with
permission.C opyright Nature Publishing Group.
Figure 6. a) Emission spectra of the crystalline and amorphous sam-
ples of BpPDBF. Inset:c hemical structure and fluorescentp hotos of
crystal and amorphous powder of BpPDBF taken under UV illumina-
tion. Adapted from Ref. [10a] with permission.C opyrightT he Royal
Society of Chemistry.b )E mission spectra of the crystalline and
amorphous samples of FBPI. Inset:c hemical structure of FBPI.
Adapted from Ref. [17b] with permission.C opyright The Royal Society
of Chemistry.c )P roposed decay pathwaysa long the potentiale nergy
curves of aC IE molecule in the crystal and amorphous state. Inset:
QM/MM models for aggregates of hexaphenylsilole, including the
embedded and exposed cases representing the crystal and amorphous
aggregates, respectively.A dapted from Ref. [17a] with permission.
Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9892 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
packed loosely in the amorphous state,w hich enables them to
undergo some sort of intramolecular motion. Consequently,
there is an energetically available conical intersection (CI) or
excited-state minimum with as mall band gap which leads to
ar ed-shift and aw eakening of the emission.[14b,c] However,i n
the crystal form, due to conformational rigidification, the CI
and excited-state minimum are not accessible energetically.
Ther eduction of non-radiative decay thus leads to stronger
emission in the blue-shifted region of the spectrum. TheC IE
phenomenon suggests that even in the amorphous solid state,
active intramolecular motion still possibly exists and influen-
ces the photophysical properties of luminogens.C rystalliza-
tion, on the other hand, can work as ap owerful strategy to
restrict the excited-state intramolecular motion and suppress
the non-radiative decay of luminogens.
2.3. Room-Temperature Phosphorescence (RTP)
Organic luminogens with room-temperature phosphores-
cence (RTP) have attracted great attention as their relatively
long-lived triplet excited states have found useful applications
such as emergencyl ighting, traffic signs,i nterior decoration,
anti-counterfeiting,a nd high-sensitive bioimaging.[21] The
main photophysical process of RTPi nvolves an efficient
singlet–triplet intersystem crossing (ISC) to generate as table
triplet exciton and its subsequent competitive radiative decay
to emit phosphorescence.[21a,b] However,c ompared with
inorganic and organometallic phosphorescent compounds,
the weak spin orbital coupling (SOC) of most organic
luminogens leads to their inefficient ISC and much slower
radiative decay of the triplet exciton. Therefore,t he realiza-
tion of pure organic RTPl uminogens is extremely challeng-
ing. Through ac omprehensive understanding of the phos-
phorescence mechanism, many effective design principles and
strategies have been proposed in the last few decades to
develop materials with persistent and stable RTP. Represen-
tative examples include halogen bonding,[22a,b] H-aggrega-
tion,[22c,d] and n-p transition[22e] to promote ISC and simulta-
neously mitigate the non-radiative decay of the triplet
exciton. On the other hand, although heavy atoms and n-p
transitions can enhance spin orbit coupling (SOC) of organic
compounds to facilitate the ISC process,w hether these effects
can promote ap hosphorescence enhancement in the solution
state is not predictable due to the relatively active non-
radiative decay.H owever, in the solid state,t hose mentioned
strategies generally make av aluable contribution to the
improvement of the observed photophysical behavior.T ang
and co-workers reported the RTPo fp ure organic halogen-
ated benzophenone (BP) derivatives.[10b] Theh eavy atoms
and lone-pair of electrons of aromatic carbonyl compounds
favor SOC,w hich allows the intrinsic triplet exciton gener-
ation through ISC.H owever,a ll the BP derivatives are not
luminescent in solution at room temperature but highly
phosphorescent at 77 Ka nd in the crystal state.F urther
investigation reveals that the numerous C@H···Oand C=
O···Br@Ci ntermolecular interactions together with heavy
atoms and n-p transitions help rigidify the conformation and
achieve more efficient spin-orbit coupling to enable bright
phosphorescence.S everal studies on the solid-state RTPo f
halogenated or carbonyl-containing organic molecules have
also emphasized the role of structure rigidification by
crystallization.[10b,2 1, 22] Based on these findings,T ang and co-
workers proposed that crystallization can stabilize the triplet
exciton and prevent it from being quenched by oxygen. At the
same time it can suppress non-radiative decay of the triplet
exciton to induce prominent phosphorescence.[10b] This crys-
tallization-induced phosphorescence (CIP) is also applicable
to many other systems and widely used to afford RTP
materials.B asically,C IP enables the simple design of RTP
molecules because non-radiative decay could be effectively
blocked by crystallization-induced conformational rigidifica-
tion. In this way,t he ISC processes can be better regulated.
Fore xample,b yc ombining the El-Sayed rule and aC IP
effect, Tang et al. rationally prepared some benzophenone
derivatives whose excited states show hybrid (n,p*) and
(p,p*) configurations to mitigate the conflict of RTPe ffi-
ciency and lifetime (Figure 7).[22e] These BP derivatives
exhibit RTPw ith both high efficiencya nd long lifetime in
the crystal state.O ne of molecules,B DBF (Figure 7b),
achieves an RTPe fficiencyo f3 4.5 %a nd al ifetime of
230 ms.T hese studies suggest that for pure molecular systems,
the key factors to achieve long-lived and bright RTPl ie
in the enhancement of the ISC process coupled with the
effective suppression of non-radiative deactivation pathways
of the triplet state.[21a] These two factors are compatible with
Figure 7. a) Schematic representation of the El-Sayed rule for ISC and
molecular-orbital hybridization of the lowest triplet states for tuning
the rate of phosphorescence decay.b )M olecular structure and photo-
graphs of amorphous powder and crystalline powder of BDBF under
365 nm UV irradiation at 300 K. c) Time-resolved PL-decay curve of
BDBF at 300 K. Inset:p hotographs of the time-dependent emission
decay of BDBF crystalline powder under 365 nm UV irradiation.[22e]
Adapted from Ref. [22e] with permission.C opyrightE lsevier.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9893Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
each other in the aggregated state especially in the crystal
state.
Although great advances have been made for single-
component pure organic RTPs ystems,e specially in terms of
understanding the underlying mechanism of the RTPp rocess,
the performances of these RTPs ystems with regards to
efficiency and lifetime need to be improved further.T oh elp
achieve this,t he construction of non-single component RTP
systems provides am ore convenient and efficient pathway to
develop pure organic RTPs ystems.T hese strategies include
co-crystallization,[23a,b] rigid matrix host–guest systems,[23c,d]
structurally modified host–guest systems,[23e] and dopant-
based systems,[23f–h] which are intrinsically based on the
integration and regulation of factors like suppression of the
non-radiative deactivation pathways,s tabilization of the
triplet exciton and/or ISC enhancement. Among these non-
single component RTPs ystems,o ne of the most exciting
breakthroughs is the dopant-based system that basically
utilizes the concept of inorganic afterglow and shows great
advantages in affording organic RTPm aterials with ultralong
lifetimes.[23f–h] Tang and co-workers have doped crystals of
quaternary phosphonium bromide salts called TPP-3C2B
with N,N-dimethylaniline (DMA), affording an ultralong
afterglow of up to 7h (Figure 8).[23h] In the doped system,
DMA works as ad opant which works with the acceptor TPP-
3C2B together to form an excitation unit denoted as ac luster
exciton.[23g,h] Theg eneration of ultralong RTPm ainly pro-
ceeds in three steps:1 )t he excitation/charge transfer,2 )t he
charge hoping and 3) the charge recombination/emission. The
excitation occurs by exciting an electron from the highest
occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor to the
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor
to complete the charge transfer. Charge hoping then happens
in the LUMO of the acceptor,r esulting in charge separation
and exciton stabilization. Afterwards,c harge recombination
proceeds from the LUMO of the acceptor to the HOMO of
the donor to lead to ultralong light emission. Thes olid
environment of the dopant protects the photo-generated
charges or radicals from quenching by atmospheric oxygen
and suppresses non-radiative deactivation pathways to allow
for such long afterglow.
2.4. Aggregation-Induced Delayed Fluorescence (AIDF)
At the aggregate level, the regulation of fluorescence and
phosphorescence can be achieved through suppression of
non-radiative decay and tuning of the ISC process.I n
addition, it is also possible to utilize both singlet and triplet
excitons to realize delayed fluorescence by promoting
reversed intersystem crossing.[24] Organic luminogens with
delayed fluorescence (DF) have aroused great interest owing
to their high exciton utilization and low cost.[25] Adachi and
co-workers made ab reakthrough in thermally activated
delayed fluorescence (TADF) by clarifying the molecular
design of TADF molecules to effectively improve the
utilization efficiency of excitons in OLEDs.[26] In spite of the
high device efficiencyo fT ADF emitters,h owever, like
phosphorescent materials,a lmost all TADF emitters have to
be dispersed into host matrices to suppress the concentration
quenching effect and/or exciton annihilation. Consequently,
ap recisely controlled doping process is generally required to
afford efficient OLEDs based on TADF emitters.M oreover,
many doped OLEDs still exhibit severe roll-off in electro-
luminescence (EL) efficiency at high luminance,w hich
becomes ad ifficult obstacle to achieving device stability and
practical applications.[10c, 27]
AIEgens generally show twisted structures,s trong emis-
sion and weak intermolecular p–p interactions in the
aggregated state.T herefore,n eat films of AIEgens are
suitable for fabricating non-doped OLED devices since they
can alleviate emission quenching and exciton annihilation. It
is thus reasonable to integrate AIE and delayed fluorescence
to produce emitters that inherit the advantages of both AIE
and delayed fluorescence.I n2 016, Tang and co-workers
reported twisted donor–acceptor structures that showed both
AIE behavior and delayed fluorescence thereby opening the
window for AIEgens to approach delayed fluorescence.[28]
Almost at the same time,Y asuda and co-workers reported
carborane derivatives with AIDF and high quantum effi-
ciency of up to 97 %i nt he aggregated state.N on-doped
OLEDs based on these o-carborane derivatives exhibited
maximum external electroluminescence quantum efficiency
of as high as 11 %, confirming the great potential of AIDF
molecules.[10c] Recently,Y ang and co-workers explored the
relationships between the aggregated state and TADF
through crystal engineering.T hey showed that aggregation
regulation is an important tool to tune the emission wave-
length, lifetime,a nd efficiencyo fT ADF emitters.[29] Tang and
co-workers systematically investigated the benzophenone-
based AIDF system, including the mechanism, structure–
Figure 8. a) Photographs of TPP-3C2B:DMA crystals taken under
365 nm UV excitation and the subsequent afterglow.b )S chematic
illustration of the afterglow from the cluster exciton composed
ac ationic quaternary phosphonium( acceptor) and an aromatic amine
(donor).[23h] Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9894 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
property relationship and device performance.A ss hown in
Figure 9a ,a molecule called CP-BP-PXZ shows typical AIE
characteristics with al ow quantum yield (QY) of 2.2 %i n
solution but aQ Yo f5 8.0 %i nt he neat film. Non-doped
OLEDs based on CP-BP-PXZ show excellent EL efficiencies
of 59.1 cd A@1,6 5.7 lm W@1,a nd 18.4 %, and an egligible
current efficiencyr oll-off of 1.2 %a t1 000 cd m@2.M oreover,
the external quantum efficiency of the non-doped devices is
even comparable to the doped ones (20.4 %, 10 wt %). These
results suggest that AIDF molecules are ideal candidates for
fabricating non-doped OLED devices with EL efficiencies
comparable with those of doped ones but with much lower or
negligible roll-off.[30a] Thes uperior device performance of
neat films of AIDF molecules was attributed to the greatly
suppressed emission quenching and exciton annihilation due
to their intrinsically twisted molecular structures and unique
packing modes.[30a] Tang et al. also discovered that neat films
of some AIDF molecules show even better performance than
that of doped films at al uminance of over 400 cd m@2.S uch
af eature is an advantage for real applications since the roll-
off at high luminescence has been ab ig obstacle of OLED
applications (Figure 9b ).[30b] Therefore,n on-doped OLED
devices based on AIDF molecules offer the advantages of low
cost, simple device fabrication techniques,a nd better repro-
ducibility,a nd could thus potentially represent an important
step towards the commercialization of OLEDs.
2.5. Anti-Kasha Transition (AKT)
Photoluminescence of most reported molecular systems
generally originate from the radiative decay of the lowest
excited state of ag iven multiplicity (S1 and T1). This has been
referred to as KashaQsr ule and is au biquitously accepted
fundamental principle in photophysics.[31] Yetf ew examples
have demonstrated emission from higher excited states.S uch
cases can be regarded as anti-Kasha transitions.R esearch on
anti-Kasha transitions not only enriches the understanding of
fundamental photophysics but also inspires new design
principles for optical functional materials,a st he radiative
decay is now not limited to the lowest excited state.
Unfortunately,e xamples of anti-Kasha transitions are still
far less common than those obeying KashaQsr ule due to the
unclear molecular design.[31] On the other hand, the reported
systems with anti-Kasha transitions such as azulenes,a cenes,
and polyenes are synthesized following traditional molecular
design and display mainly planar conjugated structures.[31b,c,
32a–c] Consequently,a lthough these compounds exhibit anti-
Kasha luminescence behavior in the solution state,w hat
happens in aggregates and the solid state is still ambiguous
because their emission is mostly quenched in aggregates.
Additionally,a st he aggregation process possibly influences
the energy split and molecular conformation,[33] whether or
not some unconventional systems without anti-Kasha behav-
ior in solution will exhibit anti-kasha transitions in the
aggregated state remains unknown. In this case,l uminogens
with AIE characteristics possibly provide new opportunities
for the development of anti-Kasha transitions.[10d,3 2d] More-
over, because the aggregation process possibly influences the
excited state characteristics such as the twisted intramolecular
charge transfer,e nergy split, intramolecular motion and
exciton decay pathway,[33] it is thus possible to tune or
switch the higher and lower excited state emission by
regulating the aggregate process.A prahamian and co-work-
ers reported as eries of BF2-hydrazine-based AIEgens with
anti-Kasha emissions.[10d] Time-dependent density functional
theory calculations and experimental results reveal that the S1
state is an approachable dark state in the solution state to
quench the emission in dilute solution. However, in aggre-
gates or ah ighly viscous environment, the internal conversion
to the dark S1 state is suppressed by restricting the rotor
rotation. Ther adiative decay of the S3 state thus occurs to give
an enhanced emission. Aprahamian and co-workers proposed
that suppression of KashaQsr ule is the photophysical mech-
anism responsible for the emission of BF2-hydrazine-based
AIEgens in both viscous solution and the solid state.[10d]
Figure 9. a) Current efficiency/luminance/power efficiency curves of
the non-dopedd evices based on CP-BP-PXZ. Configurations of devi-
ces:I TO/TAPC (25 nm)/CP-BP-PXZ (35 nm)/TmPyPB (55 nm)/LiF
(1 nm)/Al. Adapted from Ref. [30a] with permission. Copyright Wiley-
VCH. b) Luminance-external quantum efficiency characteristics of DBT-
BZ-DMAC-based OLED. Adapted from Ref. [30b] with permission.
Copyright Wiley-VCH.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9895Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Tang and co-workers reported an AIDF molecule called
DMF-BP-PXZ with an efficient S2 emission (Figure 10 a).
Similarly,t he S1 state is ad ark state.I nt he solution state,t he
rapid internal conversion allows S2 to relax to S0 through an S1
intermediate state,r esulting in quenched emission. In con-
trast, in the solid state,t he rate of internal conversion (KIC)
was greatly suppressed. This leads to ad irect relaxation from
S2 to S0 to generate bright luminescence.M ore interestingly,
non-doped and doped OLEDs with DMF-BP-PXZ as active
layers all exhibit excellent EL efficiencya nd extremely small
efficiency roll-off.T his work possibly opens an ew avenue for
the utilization of high-energy electronic excited states for light
emission.[34a] Besides the high excited-state relaxation from
the singlet state,T ang et al. also achieved the high excited
state emission from the triplet state (Figure 10 b). His group
found that the BP derivative Cl-BDBT with hybrid (n,p*) and
(p,p*) configurations shows both efficient light emission and
long lifetimes,d emonstrating an effective strategy to afford
RTPm aterials.[22e] TheT 2 emission occurs through the
thermal population from the low T1 state since the energy
gap between T1 and T2 is very small. As ar esult, dual T1 and
T2 emission generates white light from as ingle molecule.[34b]
Recently,L iu and co-workers reported ar hodamine B-
naphthalimide-based AIEgen. Interestingly,t he monomers
of RhB-Naph were non-emissive due to the presence of
ad ark S1 state.U pon aggregation, the intermolecular
interactions significantly altered the electronic properties of
RhB-Naph, resulting in bright emission from the S2 state.[33c]
At the aggregate level, new luminogens with anti-Kasha
emissions are being continuously discovered, which not only
enriches the anti-Kasha family but also promotes the real
application of luminogens with anti-Kasha emissions.M ore
importantly,t he aggregation-induced/switched anti-Kasha
transition provides av iewpoint to understand some stimuli-
responsive luminescent behaviors and motivate ad eep under-
standing of the relationship between molecular conformation,
molecular stacking, electronic structure,a nd luminescence
behaviors.
2.6. Clusterization-Triggered Emission (CTE)
Form olecular fluorescence,t here is no doubt that a p-
conjugated framework with delocalized p electrons is neces-
sary for generating the fluorescence.H owever,a tt he
aggregate level, things are different, and materials that
possess only heteroatoms (N,O ,S )o ri solated phenyl ring/
heterocycles with totally nonconjugated structures can still
show bright visible emission in their aggregates or the solid
state.[9e] Thel uminescence of an onconjugated system was
reported in 17th century,w hen Sir Francis Bacon introduced
the emission of sugar under the influence of mechanical forces
in the book “Advancement of Learning” in 1605.[9e] Although
more and more nonconjugated systems such as cellulose and
protein have since been reported to show luminescence,t his
phenomenon was not well understood.[35] In 2007, Tang et al.
reported that the nonaromatic poly[(maleic anhydride)-alt-
(vinyl acetate)] showed blue fluorescence in its colloidal
suspension but no fluorescence in dilute solution, exhibiting
ap roperty similar to that displayed by AIEgens.[36] Similar
phenomena were observed prior to or since 2007 for
siloxanes,p oly(amidoamine), and polypeptides.[37] Thev isible
emissions from these nonconjugated macromolecules sug-
gests that new chromophores with effective electron delocal-
ization and suitable band gap must be formed in aggregates or
the solid state prior to or after excitation. However,i ti ss till
not clear what chromophores are formed in the aggregates or
the solid state due to the lack of solid experimental data. Zhu
et al. reported that the emission colors of these nonconju-
gated luminogens range from blue to even red, depending on
the size of the aggregates.T his implies that the degree of
aggregation or the intermolecular interactions possibly con-
tribute greatly to the visible emission of these nonconven-
tional luminophores.[38] Qin, Tang et al. rationally designed
as eries of maleic anhydride(MA)-based polymers and
explored the influence of heteroatom interactions on their
emissions.[39] As shown in Figure 11, the oligomers of maleic
anhydride (MA), OMAh4, show bright blue emission in
solution and yellow emission in the solid state.H owever,t he
poly[(maleic anhydride)-alt-(2,4,4-trimethyl-1-pentene)]
(PMP) copolymers,i nw hich the C=O···C=Oo rO ···O
interactions are prevented by tert-butyl groups,s how no
emission either in solution or in the solid state.T hese results
indicate that both the intramolecular and intermolecular
heteroatom interactions contribute to the visible emission of
the MA-based polymers.O nt he basis of these discoveries,
Tang et al. proposed that the adjacent Oa tom may form
clusters with delocalized electron distribution through the C=
O···C=Oo rO ···Ointeractions,a nd the cluster may work as
Figure 10. a) Calculated adiabatic excitation energies and rate constant
of fluorescence and internal conversion of DMF-BP-PXZ in THF
solution and the solid state.[34a] KF = rate of fluorescence, KIC = rate of
internal conversion. Copyright Wiley-VCH.b )C alculated energy levels,
electronic transitions, and frontier molecularo rbitals of the highest
occupied molecularo rbitals (H, H-2), and the lowest unoccupied
molecularo rbital (L) of ClBDBT.A dapted from Ref. [34b] with permis-
sion. Copyrightt he Nature Publishing Group.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9896 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
chromophore of the nonconjugated OMAh4. They also
denoted this kind of emission as CTE. Additionally,t he
emission was called clusteroluminescence,a nd materials
possessing CTE properties were labelled as clusterolumino-
gens.[9e] Thes tudy of CTE helps understand the autofluor-
escence of al iving body and the phenomenon of biolumines-
cence.C lusteroluminogens also work as an important supple-
ment to traditional arene-based luminophores,s ince they are
more biocompatible and eco-friendly.
2.7. Through-Space Interaction (TSI)
Since CTE systems lack typical conjugated chromophores,
unveiling the underlying mechanism of their chromophore
formation is thus significant for ad eeper understanding of the
CTE phenomenon. Tang et al. reported on the AIE proper-
ties of nonconjugated tetraphenylethylene derivatives (s-
TPE).[40] As shown in Figure 12 a, s-TPE and s-TPE-TM are
completely nonconjugated because their four phenyl rings are
connected by two sp3-hybridized carbon atoms.H owever,
both s-TPE and s-TPE-TM exhibit AIE behavior and
emission in the visible region under UV irradiation. s-TPE
even showed an emission wavelength comparable with that of
conjugated tetraphenylethylene (TPE). Calculations indicate
that in the excited state,t he two neighboring phenyl rings of s-
TPE get closer to each other to allow electron communica-
tion, which in turn decreases the energy gap and leads to
ar ed-shift of the emission. Based on these results,t hey
proposed that the intramolecular through-space conjugation
played am ajor role in the chromophore formation and was
responsible for the emission of s-TPE in the visible region. At
the same time,M cGonigal et al. investigated the emission
behavior of as eries of phenyl-ring-substituted annulenes
bearing three,f ive,s ix, and seven phenyl groups and
demonstrated that at hrough-space aromatic-dimer was
formed in the excited state,w hich contributed to the shift of
the luminescence wavelength (Figure 12 b).[41] TangQsg roup
also demonstrated that the green emission of nonconjugated
polymers is ascribed to the through-space interaction (TSI) of
heteroatoms and phenyl rings.[42] To further demonstrate the
contribution of through-space conjugation to the electron
communication, Tang,Z hao et al. systematically compared
the conductance of single-molecule wires based on through-
space conjugation and through-bond conjugation. They found
that molecules with through-space conjugation could exhibit
comparable conductance to molecules with through-bond
conjugation.[43]
Based on these findings,T angQsg roup proposed that TSIs
possibly play ak ey role for the emissions in CTE systems.
Figure 13 shows the CTE process and its relationship with
TSI. In general, driven by hydrophobic effects,s tructural
entanglements,i nter-a nd intramolecular electrostatic inter-
actions produced by dipole or transient dipoles,o re ven
aggregation, the nonconjugated systems get closer and thus
lead to the formation of clusterluminogens.W ithin the
clusters,t he TSI originating from n–s*, n–p*, p–p*, hydrogen
bonding,e lectrostatic interactions,a nd other weak interac-
Figure 11. Chemicals tructures and photoluminescence spectra of PMP
and OMAh4 in THF with ac oncentration of 0.01 m.I nset:P hotographs
of PMP and OMAh4 in THF solution and the solid state taken under
365 nm UV light irradiation and daylight.[39] Adapted from Ref. [39] with
permission.C opyright The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Figure 12. a) Molecular structures and fluorescentp roperties of s-TPE
and s-TPE-TM, and schematic representation of through-space inter-
action. Adapted from Ref. [40] with permission.C opyrightA merican
Chemical Society.b )S teady-state photoluminescence spectroscopy of
sym-heptaphenylcycloheptatriene (Ph7C7H) (10 mm solution in 2-
MeTHF, excitation energy = 3.94 eV) at different temperatures reveals
luminescence from two different states. Inset:X -ray crystal structure of
Ph7C7H.[41] Adapted from Ref. [10h] with permission. Copyright Ameri-
can Chemical Society.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9897Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
tions allows electron communication, resulting in an arrow
band gap and thus the generation of clusteroluminescence.[9e]
2.8. Mechanoluminescence (ML)
Apart from photoluminescence,m echanoluminescence
(ML) represents another kind of fascinating emission phe-
nomenon involving the transformation of mechanical energy
to visible light. Although it has been known since 1605, its
emission mechanism was not fully understood.[44] Moreover,
since ML is usually generated by the macroscopic crystal form
of ac ompound, it is almost impossible to investigate its
emission mechanism at the molecular level. However, aggre-
gate science provides an excellent platform to study ML.
Although scientists at different times have tried hard to
propose au niversal model to explain the underlying mech-
anism of ML, these attempts have mostly ended up unsat-
isfactory.[45] Overall, it is generally thought that the electrical
field or the electrical discharge generated during the fracture
process plays ak ey role in the ML phenomenon, while the
dispute mainly focuses on how the emission happens.[46,4 7] The
proposed explanations include:
1) Thee mission originates from gas discharge
2) ML is related to the energy transfer from the excited gas to
the luminescent center
3) Theg as discharge and energy transfer mechanism coexist
These explanations are supported by experimental data
for specific conditions and cases.H owever,a ll three also have
their limitations and are not applicable for all the cases.[45]
Zink et al. and Chandra et al. proposed the theory of
electron bombardment, which seems applicable for most ML
from the fracture of organic or inorganic crystals.[48] They
proposed that the fracture of the materials produces new
surfaces accompanied with the generation of electron bom-
bardments,i nw hich the energy of the generated electrons can
be up to + 5e V, corresponding to aw avelength , 250 nm.
Therefore,t he energy transfer from electron bombardment to
the crystal is strong enough to excite most ML materials with
at ypical luminescent center.H owever,f or compounds with-
out typical luminescent centers,t he mechanism is still being
debated. In the early days,t he ML of sugar and some
inorganic crystals was thought to have originated from gas
discharge (N2 emission) because these materials do not
contain typical luminescent centers.H owever,f rom the
viewpoint of clusteroluminescence,t heir emission is more
likely ascribed to the excitation of clusteroluminogens or
impurity-doped cluster excitons.[49, 9e] On the other hand, it is
well known that solid luminogens encounter the notorious
problem of the ACQe ffect, as do the ML luminogens.I nt his
regard, AIE may help to produce more efficient ML
luminogens.T he first reported AIEgen with ML behavior
was TPCI (Figure 14 a), which is non-emissive in solution but
brightly emissive in crystals.I ntense blue ML is readily
induced upon application of mechanical force (Figure 14 a).[9a]
Chi and co-workers later observed that compound P4TA
exhibited ab right green emission under the influence of an
external force without UV irradiation, whose intensity is
much stronger than those of traditional ML materials such as
coumarin and phenanthrene (Figure 14 b).[50] These exciting
discoveries may open an ew research area for the further
development of ML materials.D uring the investigation of the
AIE behavior of TMPE (Figure 14 c), Li et al. observed
av ariety of ML properties for the different crystalline forms
of TMPE. Further exploration indicated that the molecular
Figure 13. a) Schematic illustration of the cluster formation accompa-
nied with CTE. b) Proposed mechanistic picture of clusterolumines-
cence. Adapted from Ref. [9e] with permission.C opyright Elsevier.
Figure 14. a) Chemical structures of CuI complexesT PCI and its ML
photographs taken under increasing mechanicalf orce without UV
excitation. Adapted from Ref. [9a] with permission.C opyright American
Chemical Society.b )A ni mage of the capital letters “AITL”p roduced by
ML of P4TA in the dark under ap ressure stimulus at room temper-
ature. Adapted from Ref. [50] with permission.C opyrightT he Royal
Society of Chemistry.c )P Ls pectra of the crystal and amorphous state
of TMPE upon excitation at 331 nm, and ML spectra of TMPE on
grinding without UV illumination. Adapted from Ref. [51] with permis-
sion. CopyrightT he Royal Society of Chemistry.d )P La nd ML spectra
of DMPBP.A dapted from Ref. [52a] with permission.C opyrightW iley-
VCH.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9898 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
packing of TMPE accounts for its ML performance.[51] In
general, rigid crystalline packing can effectively lock the non-
radiative channels and contribute to efficient ML perfor-
mance,s imilar to the inherent RIM mechanism of AIE. Li
and co-workers also developed the first AIE system with dual
ML emission of mechanical force-induced fluorescence and
phosphorescence (Figure 14 d).[52a] Crystal structure analysis
coupled with theoretical calculations show that the efficient
inter-a nd intramolecular interactions are the origin of its
unique dual emission and contribute much to the ISC
transition and the mechanophosphorescence.T hese results
provide new insights for the development of efficient ML
materials through crystal engineering and molecular design.
Additionally,L ie ta l. found that some phenothiazine deriv-
atives exhibit changeable ML from blue to white and yellow
upon continuous stimuli. Further analysis shows that the
change of the molecular conformation of the phenothiazine
group from quasi-axial to quasi-equatorial is responsible for
this dynamic ML.[52b] Overall, with the emergence of AIE, ML
materials have been endowed with new vitality.W ith the help
of crystal engineering,c alculations,a nd advanced X-ray
diffraction technologies,t he relationship between the molec-
ular arrangement and emission properties has been estab-
lished, thereby further advancing the fundamental under-
standing of ML.
2.9. Circularly Polarized Luminescence (CPL)
Chirality is ubiquitous in nature and almost all living
systems depend on chiral structures at the molecular,
supramolecular,a nd polymeric level.[53] Circularly polarized
light is considered to be one of the key factors related with the
origin of chirality.[54] Moreover,i th as found important
applications in many advanced optical technologies such as
optical data storage,c hiral recognition, and 3D displays.[53]
Therefore,r esearch on the generation of CPL is of both
fundamental importance and practical value.T he luminescent
dissymmetry factor and the luminescence efficiency are two
key factors that need to be taken into consideration in
developing CPL materials.T he luminescent dissymmetry
factor can be calculated by using the formula gem = 2-
(IL@IR)/(IL + IR), in which I is the fluorescence intensity of
the left (L) and right (R) CPL.[55] Known organic small
organic molecules generally show a glum of 10@5–10@3.W hen
they form self-assembled aggregates or helical assemblies,t he
glum can be amplified by one or two orders of magnitude.[56]
Therefore,m olecular aggregates at or beyond the meso-scale
level are promising candidates to produce systems with high
glum values.H owever,t raditional luminophores usually show
high luminescence only at the molecular level. Once they
aggregate and form ensembles,t he quantum efficiency
decreases significantly.A tt his stage,ac onflict exists between
ACQa nd aggregation-amplified CPL. Fortunately,A IE is
able to solve this conflict elegantly,a si tn ot only enhances the
luminescence efficiency in aggregates but is also compatible
with the self-assembly process and thus amplifies the CPL
signal.[57] Liu et al. introduced AIEgens into the design of
CPL materials in 2012. They synthesized ac hiral adduct by
attaching two mannose moieties as side chains to an AIE-
active tetraphenylsilole with strong turquoise emission. The
resulting compound shows no CPL in solution but interest-
ingly,t he molecular assemblies obtained by microfluidic
channels show extraordinarily high glum values ranging from
@0.08 to @0.32. These results demonstrate the phenomenon
of aggregation-induced CPL.[58] Such ad esign strategy was
further extended to other AIE systems which often displayed
glum values of over 10@3.[59] An example is the chiral AIEgen
called TPE-DVALi nF igure 15. TPE-DVALi sA IE-active
and shows no emission in solution but enhanced emission in
the aggregated form. Interestingly,i ts circular dichroism (CD)
and CPL spectra show similar trends and strong signals are
only observed in the aggregated state.C haracterization by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) showed that helical
structures were formed in aggregates (Figure 15).[59a] Due to
the high luminescence efficiency and the high glum value,T ang
and co-workers used this chiral AIEgen as emitting layer to
fabricate circularly polarized organic light-emitting diodes
(CPOLEDs), which exhibited high external quantum effi-
ciency of up to 9.3 %a nd 3.5 %f or the doped and neat films,
respectively.M ore interestingly,f rom doped film to neat film,
the electroluminescence dissymmetry factor (gEL)s howed an
Figure 15. a) PL spectra of TPE-DVAL in pure dichloromethane (DCM)
and DCM/hexane mixtures with different volume fractions of hexane
(fH). Concentration:1 0 mm. lex:3 20 nm. b) CD spectra of the DCM
solution (concentration: 0.5 mg mL@1)a nd the film of TPE-DVAL.
c) Plots of CPL and CPL dissymmetry factor (gem)v ersus wavelength of
cast film of TPEDVAL formed by evaporation of its DCE solution.
d) SEM image of TPE-DVAL formed by natural evaporation of its DCE
solution, concentration:1 W 10@4 m.A dapted from Ref. [59a] with per-
mission. Copyright Nature publishing group.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9899Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
amplification of almost three orders of magnitude.[60] Besides
using single chiral AIEgens to generate CPL, doped systems
using chiral/achiral AIEgens and achiral/chiral matrixes were
also developed. Fori nstance,Z hao,T ang et al. prepared
ac hiral photoluminescent liquid crystal (N*-LC) by introduc-
ing the AIEgen TPE-PPE into am ixture of nematic liquid
crystals (N-LC) and ar ight-handed chiral dopant, which
showed selective reflection and CPL upon applying ad irect
current electric field.[61] Liu and co-workers demonstrated
that chiral AIEgens can co-assemble with achiral luminogens
to form helical structures,a sar esult of which the CPL signal
is amplified through chirality and energy transfer from the
chiral AIEgen to the achiral luminogen.[62] Therefore,a tt he
aggregate level, AIE can function as ap latform compatible
with various self-assembly processes to achieve CPL materials
with both high luminescence efficiency and large glum.
Stereogenic centers and chiral additives are usually
necessary to induce an asymmetric arrangement of molecules
to form helical assemblies.H owever,a tt he aggregate level,
the achiral AIEgen itself can even form helical assemblies
without incorporating any chiral additives or external stim-
uli.[63] Fore xample,i nT PE crystals,t he four phenyl periph-
eries can rotate in clockwise or anticlockwise directions to
form M or P configurations,r espectively,t oa chieve the
transformation from achiral to chiral (Figure 16 a,b).[64a] TPE
substituted with ethyne groups retains this capability.[64b] A
similar phenomenon was also observed in hexaphenylsilole
(HPS,F igure 16 c) and tetraphenylpyrazine derivatives with
immobilized phenyl rings (TPP-cage,F igure 16 e). Aw ell
aligned helical texture can be identified in the crystalline films
of the these latent chiral AIEgens.[65] However, in solution, all
these TPE and silole derivatives are CD-silent due to the
rapid reversible change in configuration. These compounds
are therefore ag ood example of the new opportunities
offered by aggregation of molecules.
2.10. Aggregation-Induced Generation of Reactive Oxygen
Species (AIG-ROS)
Until now,w eh ave discussed al ot about the radiative
decay of the excited state,i ncluding fluorescence,p hosphor-
escence,a nd delayed fluorescence.H owever, apart from these
radiative decay processes,t he exciton may also undergo other
deactivation pathways such as internal conversion to release
energy as heat, or transfer an electron (type 1) to 3O2 to
generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide
anions (O2C@), hydroxyl radicals (OHC), and peroxides (O2
2@)
or transfer energy (type 2) to 3O2 to afford 1O2 (Fig-
ure 17 a).[1 0h, 66] ROSa re important for photodynamic therapy
(PDT) applications which has brought about significant
advances for treating skin, breast, and lung tumors.[67] The
luminogens capable of generating ROSa re known as photo-
sensitizers (PSs). To generate ROS,t he singlet exciton of PSs
first needs to undergo the intersystem crossing to produce
at riplet exciton. Traditional PSs such as porphyrin derivatives
generally have planar structures and extended conjugated p
systems and are easy to aggregate under physiological
conditions.A sa result, they show ah igh ROS generation
Figure 16. a) Helical chirality of TPE. b) CD spectra of P-TPE and M-
TPE. c) Plots of CPL dissymmetry factor (gem)v ersus wavelength for
HPS in THF solution with ac oncentration of 10@3 m,a nd in cast film.
d) Atomic force microscopic imageso ft he self-assembled helical
fibers formed by HPS upon the evaporation of its THF solution.
Adapted from Ref. [65a] with permission. Copyright The Royal Society
of Chemistry.e )M olecular structures of BETPE, TETPE, and aT PP-
cage.
Figure 17. a) Schematic diagram of the aggregation-induced generation
of ROS. b) Molecular structure of TPANPF6 and c) decomposition of
ABDA in the presence of TPANPF6 under light irradiation in dimethyl
sulfoxide/water mixtures with different water fractions (fw)( concentra-
tion of TPANPF6:1 0 mm). Adapted from Ref. [10h] with permission.
Copyright American Chemical Society.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9900 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
efficiency in solution but am uch lower ROSg eneration
efficiency in aggregates,b ecause the strong p–p stacking can
greatly accelerate the non-radiative decay of the exciton and
thereby reduce the efficiency of ISC and ROS generation.[68]
In contrast, many AIEgens display high ROSg eneration
efficiency in the aggregated state but low or no ROS
generation in the solution state.[10e,6 7] Thep oor ROSg ener-
ation in the solution state was due to active intramolecular
motion, which accelerates the non-radiative decay,r esulting
in inefficient ISC and destabilization of the triplet state.
However,i na ggregates,t he non-radiative decay was effec-
tively suppressed and the ISC efficiencya sw ell as the stability
of the triplet exciton are improved, leading to the high ROS
generation efficiency. This unique phenomenon is referred to
as AIG-ROS. AIG-ROSi sp articularly suitable for fabricat-
ing nano PSs,w hich combine the advantages of the high
targeting ability of nanoparticles and the high ROSg ener-
ation efficiency of AIEgens.F igure 17 shows the AIG-ROSo f
an AIEgen named TPANPF6,[10e] and the decomposition of
9,10-anthracenediylbis-(methylene)dimalonic acid (ABDA)
was used as an indicator to illustrate the ROS generation
efficiency of TPANPF6.I na dilute dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) solution of TPANPF6,t here is almost no ROS
generation. With gradual addition of water into the DMSO
solution, aggregates of TPANPF6 gradually form followed by
ar apid enhancement of the ROS generation.
According to af irst-order perturbation theory approach
and the Marcus semiclassical approach in the room-temper-
ature regime,b oth large SOC constants and small DEST values
are beneficial for efficient ISC and contribute to efficient
ROSg eneration.[21a,b] However,a tt he molecular level, it is
difficult to elucidate the relationship between DEST and ROS
generation efficiency because the commonly used strategy to
tune DEST is the introduction of twisted intramolecular charge
transfer (TICT) effects to enhance molecular motion in
solution so as to quench the triplet exciton.[69] At the
aggregate level, these issues could be easily solved. LiuQs
group prepared nanoparticles of tetraphenylethylene deriva-
tives with donor–acceptor structures and systematically
investigated the relationship between DEST and the efficiency
of ROS generation (Figure 18).[70] Their results indicate that
extended p-conjugation and strong D–A interaction lead to
small DEST values.M ore interestingly,a tt he aggregate level,
the nanoparticles based on molecules with small DEST
generally show higher ROSg eneration (Figure 18). There-
fore,a ggregate science also makes valuable contributions to
the development of molecular science.N otably,t he aggrega-
tion process can also enhance the emission of PSs.L iuQsg roup
demonstrated that nanoparticles prepared by nanocrystalli-
zation increased the generation of singlet oxygen by ap hoto-
sensitizer by 50 %a nd at the same time the fluorescence
quantum yield more than doubled.[71] Then anocrystals have
been applied directly for HeLa cell ablation, and are found to
be considerably more effective than their amorphous counter-
parts.T he strong emission of AIE-type PSs show great
advantages in theranostic applications such as apoptosis
process monitoring, image-guided cancer therapy,a nd
image-guided bacteria killing.[67, 72]
2.11. Photothermal (PT) and Photoacoustic (PA) Processes
Ther elease of absorbed light energy as heat is one of the
main non-radiative decay pathways of excited molecules.
Therefore,t he non-radiative decay of excited molecules can
be utilized to produce photothermal (PT) materials.[73] Photo-
thermal materials are promising for many applications such as
seawater desalination, in photothermal-electrical converters,
in photoacoustic (PA) imaging, and in PT therapy.[74] AIEgens
generally show active intramolecular motion in the solution
state that facilitates the non-radiative decay and converts the
light energy to heat efficiently.[10i] Thus,i si tp ossible to utilize
such intramolecular motion induced photothermy (iMIPT)
effects as an ew design strategy to produce highly efficient PT
materials?
It is worth noting that PT materials are normally applied
in aqueous media (e.g.f or bio-applications or sea water
desalination), in which organic luminophores incline to form
aggregates with restricted intramolecular motion. Therefore,
to apply iMIPT in PT materials production, the challenge is
how to achieve active intramolecular motion in aggregates or
in the solid state.T ang et al. combined the design strategies of
side-chain engineering,t wisted intramolecular charge trans-
fer, and molecular motion, and designed as eries of rotor-
containing donor–acceptor molecules with long, branched
alkyl chains (Figure 19).[10i] In their molecular design, the
long-chained alkyl group is expected to enable the spatial
isolation of molecules in aggregates,p roviding the necessary
room for free molecular motion. Thec ombination of
expanded p systems and strong electron-withdrawing accept-
ors with TPE on the other hand, contributes to the long
wavelength absorption, high molar absorptivity,a nd strong
Figure 18. Molecular structure of tetraphenylethylene derivatives with
donor–acceptor structures and their DEST values (black curve) and
ROS generation rates (blue curve) as well as solid power images taken
under 365 UV light illumination. Adapted from Ref. [70] with permis-
sion. CopyrightT he Royal Society of Chemistry.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9901Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
TICT effect, which further enhances their light-energy
harvesting capability and non-radiative decay.N anoparticle
suspensions based on one of the representative compounds
(2TPE-2NDTA) exhibited ah igh temperature of 81.4 88Cu pon
exposure to laser irradiation (808 nm) for 300 s. Thep hoto-
thermal conversion achieves an efficiencyo fu pt o5 4.9 %
(Figure 19 c), which is much higher than that achieved with
small molecules and polymers such as methylene blue and
PCPDTBT in control experiments.[74c] To confirm whether
2TPE-2NDTAc an really achieve molecular motion in
aggregates and whether the non-emission behavior in the
solid state is due to active intramolecular motion, they used
solid-state NMR (SSNMR) and PL spectroscopy to monitor
the molecular motion behavior of the iMIPT molecules.T he
decay time of SSNMR was used to evaluate the molecular
motion of molecules.[75] In comparison with TPE, 2TPE-
2NDTAs hows much shorter SSNMR decay times at room
temperature,s uggestive of its rapid excited state intramolec-
ular motion (Figure 19 b). Moreover,2 TPE-2NDTAi sn on-
emissive at room temperature but highly emissive at 77 Kd ue
to the restriction of the intramolecular motion (Figure 19 b
inset). This indicates that the non-emission behavior of 2TPE-
2NDTAi nt he solid state is ascribed to active intramolecular
motion. Additionally,t he authors also investigated the
relationship between the branched side chains and the non-
radiative decay efficiency, and the results show that longer
branched alkyl chains facilitate more efficient non-radiative
decay.B ased on these results,t hey proposed that iMIPT is
ar eliable strategy for the development of highly efficient
photothermal materials.T his work provided insights into the
fields of nanotechnology and molecular motion. On the basis
of the iMIPT concept, Liu et al. synthesized NIRb14,
am olecule with long,b ranched alkyl chains.T he active
intramolecular motion of NIRb14 enhances the TICT effect
and accelerates the non-radiative decay of NIRb14, resulting
in superior PT performance (Figure 20). NPs based on
NIRb14 have been used for PA image-guided photothermal
therapy,w hich can specifically accumulate in tumor sites and
suppress the proliferation capacity of tumor cells.[76] More and
more new PT systems based on iMIPT have been reported
and applied in biomedical fields,s uggesting the reliability and
potential of the iMIPT concept.[77]
Figure 19. a) The sketch map of working mechanisms of iMIPT and the NPs of iMIPT molecules for PA imaging. b) 13Cr elaxation measurements
of SSNMR of TPE and 2TPE-2NDTA. Inset:P Li ntensity of 2TPE-2NDTAa tr oom temperature and 77 K. c) The temperature changes of solutions
of NPs of 2TPE-2NDTAa sa function of time upon irradiation with a8 08 nm laser (0.8 Wcm@2)f or 300 s. Inset:I Rt hermal images of NPs of
2TPE-2NDTA upon exposure to 808 nm (0.8 Wcm@2)l aser irradiation for different times. d) PA intensity of tumor and muscle tissues as af unction
of time before (0 h) and after intravenous injection of 2TPE-2NDTA-doped NPs. Error bars, mean : standard deviation (n = 3m ice). **P < 0.01
and *P < 0.05, in comparison between tumor and muscle tissues using one-way ANOVA. Inset:P Ai mages of tumors and muscles from 2TPE-
2NDTA-doped NP-administrated mice after 2TPE-2NDTA-doped NPs (300 mm based on 2TPE-2NDTA) were intravenouslyi njected into xenograft
4T1 tumor-bearingm ice for 4h .P Ai mages were taken upon 730 nm pulsed laser irradiation with al aser fluence of 17.5 mJ cm@2 and ar epetition
rate of 10 Hz. The ultrasoundf requency is 5M Hz. Adapted from Ref. [10i]w ith permission.C opyrightN ature publishing group.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9902 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2.12. Solid-State Molecular Motion (SSMM)
Thec oncept of iMIPT demonstrates the potential of
molecular motion in developing novel optical functional
materials.H owever,t he potential applications of molecular
motion are still limited and further work is urgently required.
Although some fascinating concepts like molecular machines
have been proposed in recent years,t hey function mainly in
the solution state.[78] Theu tilization of molecular motion in
aggregates or in the solid state for practical applications has
been scarcely realized. Garibay et al. designed as eries of
molecules with dumbbell-shaped architecture and success-
fully detected the molecular rotation in crystals.[75b,79] During
the study of CIE, Tang et al observed that the CIE molecule
BpPDBF exhibited bright emission in the crystal state,w hile
its amorphous powder showed no emission, possibly due to
the excited-state molecular motion (SSMM) in the amor-
phous powder.[10a] After heating at 160 88Cf or 1m in to
crystallize the molecules,B pPDBF becomes much more
emissive due to the restriction of the molecular motion in the
crystals.T his finding motivated the authors to consider the
SSMM of AIEgens.B ecause excited-state intramolecular
motion is directly correlated with the luminescent behavior of
al uminogen, AIEgens thus enable monitoring of SSMM by
recording the changes in the fluorescence.B ym odifying
BpPDBF with flexible alkyl chains to increase the SSMM,
Tang et al. synthesized the new AIEgen pDPDBF,w hose
molecular motion in the solid state is much faster than that of
BpPDBF.[80] Furthermore,t he molecular motion in the solid
state was clearly revealed by the fluorescence change.A s
shown in Figure 21, the non-emissive amorphous pDPDBF
film becomes increasingly emissive with time at room
temperature,d emonstrating the formation of crystalline
domains through as pontaneous,r egular arrangement of
molecules.T herefore,t he spontaneous molecular motion can
be directly seen by recording the change in the fluorescence
signal. Ther esponse time of the film indicates the rate of
SSMM. Thef luorescence recovery time of pDPDBF is about
20 min. By using p–p interactions as the driving force to
induce molecular crystallization, Tang et al. developed the
molecule PIP,w hich recrystallized within 2s .M echanistic
studies indicate that PIP displays no emission in the crystal-
line but bright emission in the amorphous state,d ue to the
strong p–p stacking in the crystals.S cratching the crystalline
film destroys the dark-state crystalline domains to turn on its
emission. However,t he bright areas quickly return to the
weakly emissive state within 2s driven by the strong
intermolecular p–p interactions.[81]
3. New Advancements of AIE
Scientists have noticed that film morphology and molec-
ular arrangement strongly influence the performance of
molecular semiconductors.[82] In biological science,o nly the
multilevel structure of polypeptides rather than the isolated
polypeptides can form special proteins with biological func-
tion.[83] On closer inspection, nanoscience and supramolecular
assembly actually consider the behavior of molecular ensem-
bles rather than single molecules.N evertheless,u ntil now,
molecular science and the study of the structure–property
relationships are still the main research methodology applied
to understanding materials performance.A IE research high-
lights the importance of aggregate science in determining and
elucidating the properties of macroscopic materials,m otivat-
ing scientists to consider questions beyond the framework of
molecular science.W henm ore scientists devote their time to
AIE research, new breakthroughs will keep emerging,w hich
will further enrich and endow new vitality to the AIE
galaxy.[84–92] Several examples are given in the Supporting
Figure 20. a) Molecular structure of NIRb14 and schematic representa-
tion for PA image-guided PT therapy.b )T emperaturec hange at the
tumor site as af unctiono f8 08 nm laser irradiation (0.8 Wcm@2). Error
bars, mean : standard deviation (n = 4). c) Tumor growth curves of
mice in different treatment groups. Error bars, mean : standard
deviation (n = 8). Adapted from Ref. [76] with permission.C opyright
American Chemical Society.
Figure 21. The molecular structures of BpPDBF, pDPDBF, and PIP and
their spontaneous recovery of fluorescence with time. The photos are
taken under UV illumination at different times. Adapted from Ref. [10j]
with permission.C opyright American ChemicalS ociety.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9903Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Information of this review to highlight the new advancements.
These examples include:
1) BioAIEgens,w hich are obtained from natural products or
their derivatives and thus are biocompatible,d egradable,
and can be obtained in large quantities (Figure S1)[84a, 88]
2) X-ray excited AIEgens,w hich can overcome the chal-
lenges of autofluorescence and poor tissue penetration
depth of UV/Vis light excitation (Figure S2)[87]
3) clickable AIEgens,w hich can be bioconjugated simply and
efficiently (Figure S3)[89–92]
4. Summary and Outlook
This review summarizes the advancements of AIE and its
related branches from the viewpoint of molecular science and
aggregate science.S pecial emphasis has been placed on the
properties and new functions endowed by the molecular
aggregates.A tt he molecular level, AIE research motivates
the exploration of excited-state changes such as radiative
decay and non-radiative decay with excited-state intramolec-
ular motion and structural rigidification. At the aggregate
level, AIE actually provides an important platform to study
the influence of factors such as packing structure,a dmixture,
intermolecular interactions,a nd aggregate morphology on the
performance of macroscopic materials.F rom molecules to
aggregates,m olecular properties may be retained or lost
during the aggregation process.M ore interestingly,n ew
properties or functions that are absent in molecular species
may emerge at the aggregate level. AIE research thus
emphasizes the significance of aggregate science together
with molecular science for materials development.
In the last 20 years,A IE research has witnessed great
achievements,i ncluding mechanistic understanding,s truc-
ture–property relationships,a nd applications.O wing to its
extensive applications,A IE research is attracting more and
more attention from chemistry,p hysics,m aterials science,a nd
biomedical science and shows promising applications in these
fields.I ns pite of these achievements,d etailed information
about the excited state in AIE processes is not yet available
and remains ab ig challenge.N ew characterization techniques
such as ultrafast spectroscopy,s olid-state NMR, neutron
scattering,a nd theoretical calculations will possibly help to
get more insight into the excited-state characteristics of the
AIE process in the near future.
As ag eneral platform for studying aggregate science,A IE
keeps combining with other research fields involving materi-
als,b iology,e nergy,a nd the environment, and injects new
vitality into these fields.A sm ore researchers start working on
this field, more breakthroughs in both fundamental research
and application are anticipated in the near future.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the National
Science Foundation of China (21788102), the Research
Grants Council of Hong Kong (16305518, C6009-17G,a nd
A-HKUST 605/16), and the Innovation and Technology
Commission (ITC-CNERC14SC01).
Conflict of interest
Thea uthors declare no conflict of interest.
[1] a) W. Huang,J .L i, P.P. Edwards, Natl. Sci. Rev. 2018, 5,3 21 –
326;b )W .L .H uang,J .L i, X. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2019,
58,1 2478 –1 2484;c )J .L i, W. Huang,P .P .E dwards,M .K wauk,
J. T. Houghton, D. Slocombe, 2013, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1302.5861.
[2] a) J. S. Miller, Science 1993, 262,1 460;b )J .Y e, L.-S.M a, J. L.
Hall, J. Opt. Soc.A m. B 1998, 15,6 –1 5; c) D. Zhu, Mater.C hem.
Front. 2018, 2,1 0; d) N. G. Della, Arch.O phthalmol. 1996, 114,
457 –4 63;e )P .B all, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114,
13327 –1 3335.
[3] a) W. E. Safford, Annu. Rep.S mithsonianI nst. 1915,2 71 –2 98;
b) J. R. Partington, Ann. Sci. 1955, 11,1 –2 6; c) T. C. O’Haver, J.
Chem. Educ. 1978, 55,4 23;d )B .V aleur,M .N .B erberan-Santos,
J. Chem. Educ. 2011, 88,7 31 –7 38.
[4] a) A. Roda, in Chemiluminescence and Bioluminescence:P ast,
Present and Future,T he Royal Society of Chemistry,L ondon,
2011,p p. 1–5 0; b) E. D. Clarke, Ann. Philos. 1819,3 4– 36.
[5] B. Valeur,M .N .B erberan-Santosin in Molecular Fluorescence,
Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2002,p p. 53 –7 4.
[6] A. Jablonski, Nature 1933, 131,8 39 –8 40.
[7] a) J. Weiss, Nature 1943, 152,1 76 –1 78;b )W .F .W atson, R.
Livingston, Nature 1948, 162,4 52 –4 53.
[8] J. Luo,Z .X ie,J .W .Y .L am, L. Cheng,H .C hen, C. Qiu, H. S.
Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu, D. Zhu, B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun.
2001,1 740 –1 741.
[9] a) J. Mei, N. L. C. Leung,R .T .K .K wok, J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z.
Tang, Chem. Rev. 2015, 115,1 1718 –1 1940;b )C .Z hu, R. T. K.
Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z. Tang, ACSA ppl. Bio Mater. 2018, 1,
1768 –1 786;c )Y .C hen, J. W. Y. Lam, R. T. K. Kwok, B. Liu,
B. Z. Tang, Mater.H oriz. 2019, 6,4 28 –4 33;d )X .H e, L.-H.
Xiong,Z .Z hao,Z .W ang,L .L uo,J .W .Y .L am, R. T. K. Kwok,
B. Z. Tang, Theranostics 2019, 9,3 223 –3 248;e )H .Z hang,Z .
Zhao,P .R .M cGonigal, R. Ye,S .L iu, J. W. Y. Lam, R. T. K.
Kwok, W. Z. Yuan, J. Xie,A .L .R ogach, B. Z. Tang, Mater.
Today 2020, 32,2 75 –2 92.
[10] a) Y. Dong,J .W .Y .L am, A. Qin, Z. Li, J. Sun, H. H. Y. Sung,
I. D. Williams,B .Z .T ang, Chem. Commun. 2007,4 0– 42;
b) W. Z. Yuan, X. Y. Shen, H. Zhao,J .W .Y .L am, L. Tang,P .
Lu, C. Wang,Y .L iu, Z. Wang,Q .Z heng,J .Z .S un, Y. Ma, B. Z.
Tang, J. Phys.C hem. C 2010, 114,6 090 –6 099;c )R .F urue,T .
Nishimoto, I. S. Park, J. Lee,T .Y asuda, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed.
2016, 55,7 171 –7 175; Angew.C hem. 2016, 128,7 287 –7 291;d )H .
Qian, M. E. Cousins,E .H .H orak, A. Wakefield, M. D. Liptak, I.
Aprahamian, Nat. Chem. 2017, 9,8 3– 87;e )H .Z hang,X .Z heng,
N. Xie,Z .H e, J. Liu, N. L. C. Leung,Y .N iu, X. Huang,K .S .
Wong,R .T .K .K wok, H. H. Y. Sung,I .D .W illiams,A .Q in,
J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139,1 6264 –
16272;f )J .Y ang,J .Q in, P.Geng, J. Wang,M .F ang,Z .L i, Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57,1 4174 –1 4178; Angew.C hem. 2018, 130,
14370 –1 4374;g )J .L iu, H. Su, L. Meng,Y .Z hao,C .D eng,
J. C. Y. Ng, P.Lu, M. Faisal, J. W. Y. Lam, X. Huang,H .W u, K. S.
Wong,B .Z .T ang, Chem. Sci. 2012, 3,2 737 –2 747;h )Z .L iu, H.
Zou, Z. Zhao,P .Z hang,G .-G.S han, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y.
Lam, L. Zheng,B .Z .T ang, ACSN ano 2019, 13,1 1283 –1 1293;
i) Z. Zhao,C .C hen, W. Wu,F .W ang,L .D u, X. Zhang,Y .X iong,
X. He,Y .C ai, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, X. Gao,P.S un, D. L.
Phillips,D .D ing,B .Z .T ang, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10,7 68;j )S .
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9904 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Liu, Y. Li, H. Zhang,Z .Z hao,X .L u, J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z. Tang,
ACSM ater.L ett. 2019, 1,4 25 –4 31.
[11] G. G. Stokes, Philos.T rans.R .S oc.L ondon 1852, 142,4 63 –5 62.
[12] J. Chen, C. C. W. Law,J .W .Y .L am, Y. Dong,S .M .F .L o, I. D.
Williams,D .Z hu, B. Z. Tang, Chem. Mater. 2003, 15,1 535 –1 546.
[13] a) N. L. C. Leung, N. Xie,W .Y uan, Y. Liu, Q. Wu,Q .P eng,Q .
Miao,J .W .Y .L am, B. Z. Tang, Chem. Eur.J . 2014, 20,1 5349 –
15353;b )Z .Z hao,X .Z heng,L .D u, Y. Xiong,W .H e, X. Gao,C .
Li, Y.Liu, B. Xu, J. Zhang,F.S ong,Y.Y u, X. Zhao,Y.C ai, X. He,
R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, X. Huang,D .L ee Phillips,H .
Wang,B .Z .T ang, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10,2 952.
[14] a) S. Yin, Q. Peng,Z .S huai, W. Fang,Y .-H. Wang,Y .L uo, Phys.
Rev.B 2006, 73,2 05409;b )Q .L i, L. Blancafort, Chem.
Commun. 2013, 49,5 966 –5 968;c )Y .J .G ao,X .P.C hang,X .Y .
Liu, Q. S. Li, G. Cui, W. Thiel, J. Phys.C hem. A 2017, 121,2 572 –
2579;d )Y .T u, J. Liu, H. Zhang,Q .P eng,J .W .Y .L am, B. Z.
Tang, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58,1 4911 –1 4914; Angew.
Chem. 2019, 131,1 5053 –1 5056.
[15] a) Y. Cheng,J .D ai, C. Sun, R. Liu, T. Zhai, X. Lou, F. Xia,
Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2018, 57,3 123 –3 127; Angew.C hem. 2018,
130,3 177 –3 181;b )Z .H e, P. Liu, S. Zhang,J .Y an, M. Wang,Z .
Cai, J. Wang,Y .D ong, Angew.C hem. 2019, 131,3 874 –3 877;
c) N. Sinha, L. Stegemann, T. T. Tan, N. L. Doltsinis,C .A .
Strassert, F. E. Hahn, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56,2 785 –
2789; Angew.C hem. 2017, 129,2 829 –2 833.
[16] a) J. Guo,X .L .L i, H. Nie,W .L uo,S .G an, S. Hu, R. Hu, A. Qin,
Z. Zhao,S .-J.S u, B. Z. Tang, Adv.F unct. Mater. 2017, 27,
1606458;b )Z .Z hao,S .G ao,X .Z heng,P .Z hang,W .W u,
R. T. K. Kwok, Y. Xiong,N .L .C .L eung, Y. Chen, X. Gao,
J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z. Tang, Adv.F unct. Mater. 2018, 28,1 705609;
c) Z. Zhao,H .N ie,C .G e, Y. Cai, Y. Xiong,J .Q i, W.Wu,R .T .K .
Kwok, X. Gao,A .Q in, J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z. Tang, Adv.S ci. 2017,
4,1 700005;d )A .J .C .K uehne,M .C .G ather, Chem. Rev. 2016,
116,1 2823 –1 2864;e )W .Z hang,Y .Y an, J. Gu, J. Yao, Y. S.
Zhao, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2015, 54,7 125 –7 129; Angew.
Chem. 2015, 127,7 231 –7 235.
[17] a) X. Zheng,Q .P eng,L .Z hu, Y. Xie,X . Huang,Z . Shuai,
Nanoscale 2016, 8,1 5173 –1 5180;b )M .Y amaguchi, S. Ito,A .
Hirose,K .T anaka, Y. Chujo, Mater.C hem. Front. 2017, 1,1 573 –
1579.
[18] a) Y. Huang,J .X ing,Q .G ong,L .-C.C hen, G. Liu, C. Yao, Z.
Wang,H .-L. Zhang,Z .C hen, Q. Zhang, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10,
169;b )D .L iu, K. Sun, G. Zhao,J .W ei, J. Duan, M. Xia, W.Jiang,
Y. Sun, J. Mater.C hem. C 2019, 7,1 1005 –1 1013;c )O .D .
Parashchuk, A. A. Mannanov,V .G .K onstantinov,D .I .D omi-
nskiy,N .M .S urin, O. V. Borshchev,S .A .P onomarenko, M. S.
Pshenichnikov,D .Y .P araschuk, Adv.F unct. Mater. 2018, 28,
1800116.
[19] a) T. Chen, S. Yang,J .C hai, Y. Song,J .F an, B. Rao,H .S heng,H .
Yu,M .Z hu, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3,e 1700956;b )Z .W ang,T .W ang,C .
Zhang,M .G .H umphrey, Phys.C hem. Chem. Phys. 2017, 19,
12928 –1 2935;c )Y .G ong, L. Zhao,Q .P eng,D .F an, W. Z. Yuan,
Y. Zhang,B .Z .T ang, Chem. Sci. 2015, 6,4 438 –4 444;d )N .
Nirmalananthan, T. Behnke,K .H offmann, D. Kage,C .F .G ers-
Panther,W .F rank, T. J. J. Mgller,U .R esch-Genger, J. Phys.
Chem. C 2018, 122,1 1119 –1 1127;e )J .T ong,Y .J .W ang,Z .
Wang,J .Z .S un, B. Z. Tang, J. Phys.C hem. C 2015, 119,2 1875 –
21881.
[20] a) S. Ma, K. Zhou, M. Hu, Q. Li, Y. Liu, H. Zhang,J .J ing,H .
Dong,B .X u, W. Hu, W. Tian, Adv.F unct. Mater. 2018, 28,
1802454;b )Z .Q in, H. Gao,J .L iu, K. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Dang,L .
Huang,H .D eng,X . Zhang,H .D ong,W .H u, Adv.M ater. 2019,
31,1 903175;c )J .L i, K. Zhou, J. Liu, Y. Zhen, L. Liu, J. Zhang,
H. Dong, X. Zhang,L .J iang, W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017,
139,1 7261.
[21] a) Kenry,C .C hen, B. Liu, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10,2 111;b )Y .
Xiong,Z .Z hao,W .Z hao,H .M a, Q. Peng,Z .H e, X. Zhang,Y .
Chen, X. He,J .W .Y .L am, B. Z. Tang, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed.
2018, 57,7 997 –8 001; Angew.C hem. 2018, 130,8 129 –8 133;c )W .
Zhao,T .S .C heung,N .J iang,W .H uang,J .W .Y .L am, X. Zhang,
Z. He,B .Z .T ang, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10,1 595;d )J .W ang,X .
Gu, H. Ma, Q. Peng, X. Huang,X . Zheng,S .H .P.S ung,G .S han,
J. W. Y. Lam, Z. Shuai, B. Z. Tang, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9,2 963.
[22] a) O. Bolton, K. Lee,H .-J.K im, K. Y. Lin, J. Kim, Nat. Chem.
2011, 3,2 05 –2 10;b )S .C ai, H. Shi, D. Tian, H. Ma, Z. Cheng,Q .
Wu,M .G u, L. Huang,Z .A n, Q. Peng, W. Huang, Adv.F unct.
Mater. 2018, 28,1 705045;c )Z .A n, C. Zheng,Y .T ao,R .C hen, H.
Shi, T. Chen, Z. Wang,H .L i, R. Deng,X .L iu, W. Huang, Nat.
Mater. 2015, 14,6 85 –6 90;d )E .L ucenti, A. Forni, C. Botta, L.
Carlucci,C .G iannini, D. Marinotto,A .P revitali, S. Righetto,E .
Cariati, J. Phys.C hem. Lett. 2017, 8,1 894 –1 898;e )W .Z hao,Z .
He,J .W .Y .L am, Q. Peng,H .M a, Z. Shuai, G. Bai, J. Hao,B .Z .
Tang, Chem 2016, 1,5 92 –6 02;f )Y .G ong, G. Chen, Q. Peng,
W. Z. Yuan, Y. Xie,S .L i, Y. Zhang,B .Z .T ang, Adv.M ater. 2015,
27,6 195 –6 201.
[23] a) O. Bolton, D. Lee,J .J ung,J .K im, Chem. Mater. 2014, 26,
6644 –6 649;b )Q .J .S hen, X. Pang, X. R. Zhao,H .Y .G ao,H .-L.
Sun, W. J. Jin, CrystEngComm 2012, 14,5 027 –5 034;c )D .L ee,
O. Bolton, B. C. Kim, J. H. Youk, S. Takayama, J. Kim, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2013, 135,6 325 –6 329;d )Y .S u, S. Z. F. Phua, Y. Li,
X. Zhou, D. Jana, G. Liu, W. Q. Lim, W. K. Ong,C .Y ang,Y .
Zhao, Sci. Adv. 2018, 4,e aas9732;e )D .L i, F.Lu, J. Wang,W .H u,
X.-M. Cao,X .M a, H. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140,1 916 –
1923;f )R .K abe,C .A dachi, Nature 2017, 550,3 84 –3 87;g )X .
Zhang,L .D u, W. Zhao,Z .Z hao,Y .X iong,X .H e, P.F. Gao,P .
Alam, C. Wang,Z .L i, J. Leng,J .L iu, C. Zhou, J. W. Y. Lam,
D. L. Phillips,G .Z hang,B .Z .T ang, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10,
5161;h )P.A lam, N. Leung, J. Liu, X. Zhang,Z .H e, R. T. K.
Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung,I .D .W illiams,Q .P eng,B .Z .
Tang, Adv.M ater. 2020,2 001026 .
[24] Y. C. Duan, L. L. Wen, Y. Gao,Y .W u, L. Zhao,Y .G eng,G .G .
Shan, M. Zhang,Z .M .S u, J. Phys.C hem. C 2018, 122,2 3091 –
23101.
[25] a) Y. Liu, C. Li, Z. Ren, S. Yan, M. R. Bryce, Nat. Rev.M ater.
2018, 3,1 8020;b )Z .Y ang,Z .M ao,Z .X ie,Y .Z hang,S .L iu, J.
Zhao,J .X u, Z. Chi, M. P.Aldred, Chem. Soc.R ev. 2017, 46,9 15 –
1016;c )M .Y .W ong, E. Zysman-Colman, Adv.M ater. 2017, 29,
1605444.
[26] a) Q. Zhang,B .L i, S. Huang,H .N omura, H. Tanaka, C. Adachi,
Nat. Photonics 2014, 8,3 26 –3 32;b )Q .Z hang,J .L i, K. Shizu, S.
Huang,S .H irata, H. Miyazaki, C. Adachi, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2012, 134,1 4706 –1 4709.
[27] M. R. Bryce, Sci. China Chem. 2017, 60,1 561 –1 562.
[28] S. Gan, W. Luo,B .H e, L. Chen, H. Nie,R . Hu, A. Qin, Z. Zhao,
B. Z. Tang, J. Mater.C hem. C 2016, 4,3 705 –3 708.
[29] K. Zheng,F .N i, Z. Chen, C. Zhong,C .Y ang, Angew.C hem. Int.
Ed. 2019,h ttps://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201913210; Angew.C hem.
2019,h ttps://doi.org/10.1002/ange.201913210.
[30] a) J. Huang,H .N ie,J .Z eng,Z .Z huang,S .G an, Y. Cai, J. Guo,
S.-J.S u, Z. Zhao,B .Z .T ang, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56,
12971 –1 2976; Angew.C hem. 2017, 129,1 3151 –1 3156;b )J .
Guo,Z .Z hao,B .Z .T ang, Adv.O pt. Mater. 2018, 6,1 800264.
[31] a) H.-W.T seng,J .-Y.S hen, T.-Y.K uo,T .-S.T u, Y.-A. Chen, A. P.
Demchenko,P .-T.C hou, Chem. Sci. 2016, 7,6 55 –6 65;b )A .P .
Demchenko,V .I .T omin, P.-T.C hou, Chem. Rev. 2017, 117,
13353 –1 3381;c )T .I toh, Chem. Rev. 2012, 112,4 541 –4 568.
[32] a) Z. Peng,Z .W ang,Z .H uang,S .L iu, P. Lu, Y. Wang, J. Mater.
Chem. C 2018, 6,7 864 –7 873;b )Y .Z hou, G. Baryshnikov,X .L i,
M. Zhu, H. cgren, L. Zhu, Chem. Mater. 2018, 30,8 008 –8 016;
c) M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao,J .C lark, R. S. S. Kumar,D .B rida, G.
Cerullo,R .H .F riend, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133,1 1830 –
11833;d )Y .G ong,Y .Z hou, B. Yue, B. Wu,R .S un, S. Qu, L.
Zhu, J. Phys.C hem. C 2019, 123,2 2511 –2 2518.
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9905Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
[33] a) W. H. Lee,Z .Z hao,Y .C ai, Z. Xu, Y. Yu,Y .X iong,R .T .K .
Kwok, Y. Chen, N. L. C. Leung,D .M a, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin,
B. Z. Tang, Chem. Sci. 2018, 9,6 118 –6 125;b )L .Y ang,X .W ang,
G. Zhang,X .C hen, G. Zhang,J .J iang, Nanoscale 2016, 8,
17422 –1 7426;c )Q .Q i, L. Huang,R .Y ang,J .L i, Q. Qiao,B .X u,
W. Tian, X. Liu, Z. Xu, Chem. Commun. 2019, 55,1 446 –1 449.
[34] a) J. Guo,J .F an, L. Lin, J. Zeng,H .L iu, C.-K. Wang,Z .Z hao,
B. Z. Tang, Adv.S ci. 2019, 6,1 801629;b )Z .H e, W.Zhao,J .W .Y .
Lam, Q. Peng,H .M a, G. Liang, Z. Shuai, B. Z. Tang, Nat.
Commun. 2017, 8,4 16.
[35] a) Y. Gong, Y. Tan, J. Mei, Y. Zhang,W .Y uan, Y. Zhang,J .S un,
B. Z. Tang, Sci. China Chem. 2013, 56,1 178 –1 182;b )X .D ou, Q.
Zhou, X. Chen, Y. Tan, X. He,P .L u, K. Sui, B. Z. Tang,Y .
Zhang,W .Z .Y uan, Biomacromolecules 2018, 19,2 014 –2 022;
c) R. Ye,Y .L iu, H. Zhang,H .S u, Y. Zhang,L .X u, R. Hu,
R. T. K. Kwok, K. S. Wong, J. W. Y. Lam, W. A. Goddard, B. Z.
Tang, Polym. Chem. 2017, 8,1 722 –1 727;d )Q .W ang,X .D ou, X.
Chen, Z. Zhao,S .W ang,Y .W ang,K .S ui, Y. Tan, Y. Gong, Y.
Zhang,W .Z .Y uan, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58,1 2667 –
12673; Angew.C hem. 2019, 131,1 2797 –1 2803.
[36] C. M. Xing,J .W .Y .L am, A. J. Qin, Y. Q. Dong,M .H -ubler,
W. T. Yang,B .Z .T ang, Polym. Mater.S ci. Eng. 2007, 96,4 18 –
419.
[37] a) L. D. Carlos,V .d eZ ea Bermudez, V. S. Amaral, S. C. Nunes,
N. J. O. Silva, R. A. S# Ferreira, J. Rocha, C. V. Santilli, D.
Ostrovskii, Adv.M ater. 2007, 19,3 41 –3 48;b )V .B ekiari, P.
Lianos, Langmuir 1998, 14,3 459 –3 461;c )O .V arnavski, R. G.
Ispasoiu,L .B alogh, D. Tomalia, T. Goodson, J. Chem. Phys.
2001, 114,1 962 –1 965;d )W .I .L ee,Y .B ae,A .J .B ard, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2004, 126,8 358 –8 359;e )K .T .A l-Jamal, P. Ruen-
raroengsak, N. Hartell, A. T. Florence, J. Drug Targeting 2006,
14,4 05 –4 12.
[38] R. Wang,W .Y uan, X. Zhu, Chin. J. Polym. Sci. 2015, 33,6 80 –
687.
[39] X. Zhou, W. Luo,H .N ie,L .X u, R. Hu, Z. Zhao,A .Q in, B. Z.
Tang, J. Mater.C hem. C 2017, 5,4 775 –4 779.
[40] H. Zhang,X .Z heng,N .X ie,Z .H e, J. Liu, N. L. C. Leung, Y. Niu,
X. Huang,K .S .W ong,R .T .K .K wok, H. H. Y. Sung,I .D .
Williams,A .Q in, J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2017, 139,1 6264 –1 6272.
[41] J. Sturala, M. K. Etherington,A .N .B ismillah, H. F. Higginbo-
tham, W. Trewby,J .A .A guilar,E .H .C .B romley,A .-J.A vestro,
A. P. Monkman, P.R. McGonigal, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139,
17882 –1 7889.
[42] T. Han, H. Deng,Z .Q iu, Z. Zhao,H .Z hang,H .Z ou, N. L. C.
Leung,G .S han, M. R. J. Elsegood,J .W .Y .L am, B. Z. Tang, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140,5 588 –5 598.
[43] a) J. Li, P. Shen, Z. Zhao,B .Z .T ang, CCS Chem. 2019, 1,1 81 –
196;b )L .C hen, Y.-H. Wang,B .H e, H. Nie,R .H u, F. Huang,A .
Qin, X.-S.Z hou, Z. Zhao,B .Z .T ang, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed.
2015, 54,4 231 –4 235; Angew.C hem. 2015, 127,4 305 –4 309.
[44] J. I. Zink, Acc.C hem. Res. 1978, 11,2 89 –2 95.
[45] Y. Xie,Z .L i, Chem 2018, 4,9 43 –9 71.
[46] J. I. Zink, G. E. Hardy,J .E .S utton, J. Phys.C hem. 1976, 80,2 48 –
249.
[47] B. P. Chandra, V. K. Chandra, P. Jha, J. Lumin. 2013, 135,1 39 –
153.
[48] B. P. Chandra, V. K. Chandra, P. Jha, R. Patel, S. K. Shende,S .
Thaker,R .N .B aghel, J. Lumin. 2012, 132,2 012 –2 022.
[49] B. P. Chandra, J. I. Zink, Inorg.C hem. 1980, 19,3 098 –3 102.
[50] B. Xu, J. He,Y .M u, Q. Zhu, S. Wu,Y .W ang,Y .Z hang,C .J in, C.
Lo,Z .C hi, A. Lien, S. Liu, J. Xu, Chem. Sci. 2015, 6,3 236 –3 241.
[51] C. Wang,B .X u, M. Li, Z. Chi, Y. Xie,Q .L i, Z. Li, Mater.H oriz.
2016, 3,2 20 –2 25.
[52] a) J. Yang,Z .R en, Z. Xie,Y .L iu, C. Wang,Y .X ie,Q .P eng,B .
Xu, W. Tian, F. Zhang,Z .C hi, Q. Li, Z. Li, Angew.C hem. Int.
Ed. 2017, 56,8 80 –8 84; Angew.C hem. 2017, 129,8 98 –9 02;b )J .
Yang,J .Q in, P.Geng,J .W ang,M .F ang,Z .L i, Angew.C hem. Int.
Ed. 2018, 57,1 4174 –1 4178; Angew.C hem. 2018, 130,1 4370 –
14374.
[53] a) J. Han, S. Guo,H .L u, S. Liu, Q. Zhao,W .H uang, Adv.O pt.
Mater. 2018, 6,1 800538;b )D .Y ang,P .D uan, L. Zhang,M .L iu,
Nat. Commun. 2017, 8,1 5727.
[54] G. Yang,S .Z hang,J .H u, M. Fujiki, G. Zou, Symmetry 2019, 11,
474.
[55] J. Roose,B .Z .T ang,K .S .W ong, Small 2016, 12,6 495 –6 512.
[56] J. Han, P. Duan, X. Li, M. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139,
9783 –9 786.
[57] Y. Sang, J. Han, T. Zhao,P .D uan, M. Liu, Adv.M ater. 2019, 31,
1900110.
[58] J. Liu, H. Su, L. Meng,Y .Z hao,C .D eng,J .C .Y .N g, P. Lu, M.
Faisal, J. W. Y. Lam, X. Huang,H .W u, K. S. Wong,B .Z .T ang,
Chem. Sci. 2012, 3,2 737 –2 747.
[59] a) H. Li, X. Zheng,H .S u, J. W. Y. Lam, K. S. Wong, S. Xue,X .
Huang,X .H uang,B .S .L i, B. Z. Tang, Sci. Rep. 2016, 6,1 9277;
b) X. Li, W. Hu, Y. Wang,Y .Q uan, Y. Cheng, Chem. Commun.
2019, 55,5 179 –5 182;c )X .Z hang,Y .Z hang,H .Z hang,Y .Q uan,
Y. Li, Y. Cheng,S .Y e, Org.L ett. 2019, 21,4 39 –4 43;d )S .Z hang,
Y. Wang,F .M eng,C .D ai, Y. Cheng,C .Z hu, Chem. Commun.
2015, 51,9 014 –9 017.
[60] F. Song,Z .X u, Q. Zhang,Z .Z hao,H .Z hang,W .Z hao,Z .Q iu,
C. Qi, H. Zhang,H .H .Y .S ung,I .D .W illiams,J .W .Y .L am, Z.
Zhao,A .Q in, D. Ma, B. Z. Tang, Adv.F unct. Mater. 2018, 28,
1800051.
[61] a) D. Zhao,F .F an, J. Cheng,Y .Z hang,K .S .W ong,V .G .
Chigrinov,H .S .K wok, L. Guo,B .Z .T ang, Adv.O pt. Mater.
2015, 3,1 99 –2 02;b )D .Z hao,H .H e, X. Gu, L. Guo,K .S .W ong,
J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z. Tang, Adv.O pt. Mater. 2016, 4,5 34 –5 39.
[62] L. Ji, Y. Sang, G. Ouyang,D .Y ang,P .D uan, Y. Jiang,M .L iu,
Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58,8 44 –8 48; Angew.C hem. 2019,
131,8 54 –8 58.
[63] H. T. Feng,C .L iu, Q. Li, H. Zhang,J .W .Y .L am, B. Z. Tang,
ACS. Mater.L ett. 2019, 1,1 92 –2 02.
[64] a) L. Ding,L .L in, C. Liu, H. Li, A. Qin, Y. Liu, L. Song,H .
Zhang,B .Z .T ang,Y .Z hao, New J. Chem. 2011, 35,1 781 –1 786;
b) D. Li, R. Hu, D. Guo,Q .Z ang,J .L i, Y. Wang,Y .-S.Z heng,
B. Z. Tang,H .Z hang, J. Phys.C hem. C 2017, 121,2 0947 –2 0954.
[65] a) S. Xue,L .M eng, R. Wen, L. Shi, J. W. Lam, Z. Tang,B .S .L i,
B. Z. Tang, RSC Adv. 2017, 7,2 4841 –2 4847;b )H .T .F eng,X .
Zheng,X .G u, M. Chen, J. W. Y. Lam, X. Huang,B .Z .T ang,
Chem. Mater. 2018, 30,1 285 –1 290;c )H .Q u, Y. Wang,Z .L i, X.
Wang,H .F ang,Z .T ian, X. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139,
18142 –1 8145;d )J .-B.X iong,H .-T.F eng,J .-P.S un, W.-Z. Xie,D .
Yang,M .L iu, Y.-S.Z heng, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138,1 1469 –
11472.
[66] R. Zhang,Y .D uan, B. Liu, Nanoscale 2019, 11,1 9241 –1 9250.
[67] a) C. Chen, X. Ni, S. Jia, Y. Liang,X .W u, D. Kong,D .D ing, Adv.
Mater. 2019, 31,1 904914;b )C .Z hang,Y .Z hao,D .L i, J. Liu, H.
Han, D. He,X . Tian, S. Li, J. Wu,Y .T ian, Chem. Commun. 2019,
55,1 450 –1 453;c )X .G u, X. Zhang,H .M a, S. Jia, P. Zhang,Y .
Zhao,Q .L iu, J. Wang,X .Z heng,J .W .Y .L am, D. Ding, B. Z.
Tang, Adv.M ater. 2018, 30,1 801065;d )Y .Z heng,H .L u, Z.
Jiang,Y .G uan, J. Zou, X. Wang,R .C heng,H .G ao, J. Mater.
Chem. B 2017, 5,6 277 –6 281;e )Y .L i, Z. Zhao,J .Z hang,R .T .K .
Kwok, S. Xie,R .T ang,Y .J ia, J. Yang,L .W ang,J .W .Y .L am, W.
Zheng,X .J iang, B. Z. Tang, Adv.F unct. Mater. 2018, 28,
1804632;f )M .K ang,C .Z hou, S. Wu, B. Yu,Z .Z hang,N .S ong,
M. M. S. Lee,W .X u, F.-J.X u, D. Wang,L .W ang,B .Z .T ang, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141,1 6781 –1 6789.
[68] S. Y. Park, H. J. Baik, Y. T. Oh, K. T. Oh, Y. S. Youn, E. S. Lee,
Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2011, 50,1 644 –1 647; Angew.C hem. 2011,
123,1 682 –1 685.
[69] a) W. Wu,D .M ao,F .H u, S. Xu, C. Chen, C.-J.Z hang,X .C heng,
Y.Yuan, D. Ding, D. Kong,B .L iu, Adv.M ater. 2017, 29,1 700548;
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9906 www.angewandte.org T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim Angew.C hem.I nt. Ed. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
b) Q. Li, Y. Li, T. Min, J. Gong,L .D u, D. L. Phillips,J .L iu,
J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung,I .D .W illiams,R .T .K . Kwok, C. L.
Ho,K .L i, J. Wang,B .Z .T ang, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2020, 59,
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201909706; Angew.C hem. 2020, 132,
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201909706;c )X .C ai, D. Mao,C .
Wang,D .K ong, X. Cheng,B .L iu, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2018,
57,1 6396 –1 6400; Angew.C hem. 2018, 130,1 6634 –1 6638.
[70] S. Xu, W. Wu,X .C ai, C.-J.Z hang,Y .Y uan, J. Liang,G .F eng,P .
Manghnani, B. Liu, Chem. Commun. 2017, 53,8 727 –8 730.
[71] S. M. A. Fateminia, L. Kacenauskaite,C .-J.Z hang,S .M a, Kenry,
P.N. Manghnani, J. Chen, S. Xu, F. Hu, B. Xu, B. W. Laursen, B.
Liu, Small 2018, 14,1 803325.
[72] a) Z. Zheng,T .Z hang,H .L iu, Y. Chen, R. T. K. Kwok, C. Ma, P.
Zhang,H .H .Y .S ung,I .D .W illiams,J .W .Y .L am, K. S. Wong,
B. Z. Tang, ACSN ano 2018, 12,8 145 –8 159;b )T .Z hang,Y .L i,
Z. Zheng,R .Y e, Y. Zhang,R .T .K .K wok, J. W. Y. Lam, B. Z.
Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141,5 612 –5 616;c )D .W ang,
M. M. S. Lee,G .S han, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, H. Su, Y.
Cai, B. Z. Tang, Adv.M ater. 2018, 30,1 802105.
[73] H. S. Jung,P.V erwilst, A. Sharma, J. Shin, J. L. Sessler,J .S .K im,
Chem. Soc.R ev. 2018, 47,2 280 –2 297.
[74] a) W. C. Chueh, C. Falter,M .A bbott, D. Scipio,P .F urler,S .M .
Haile,A .S teinfeld, Science 2010, 330,1 797 –1 801;b )E .T .K ho,
T. H. Tan, E. Lovell, R. J. Wong,J .S cott, R. Amal, Green Energy
Environ. 2017, 2,2 04 –2 17;c )K .P u, A. J. Shuhendler, J. V.
Jokerst, J. Mei, S. S. Gambhir,Z .B ao,J .R ao, Nat. Nanotechnol.
2014, 9,2 33 –2 39;d )L .Z hou, Y. Tan, J. Wang,W .X u, Y. Yuan,
W. Cai, S. Zhu, J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics 2016, 10,3 93 –3 98.
[75] a) A. Comotti, S. Bracco,A .Y amamoto,M .B eretta, T.
Hirukawa, N. Tohnai, M. Miyata, P. Sozzani, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2014, 136,6 18 –6 21;b )M .E .H owe,M .A .G arcia-Garibay,
J. Org.C hem. 2019, 84,9 570 –9 576.
[76] S. Liu, X. Zhou, H. Zhang,H .O u, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. Liu, L. Shi, D.
Ding,B .Z .T ang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141,5 359 –5 368.
[77] a) X. Cai, J. Liu, W. H. Liew,Y .D uan, J. Geng,N .T hakor,K .
Yao, L.-D.L iao,B .L iu, Mater.C hem. Front. 2017, 1,1 556 –1 562;
b) D. Wang,M .M .S .L ee,W .X u, G. Shan, X. Zheng,R .T .K .
Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, X. Hu, B. Z. Tang, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed.
2019, 58,5 628 –5 632; Angew.C hem. 2019, 131,5 684 –5 688;c )B .
Guo,Z .H uang,Q .S hi, E. Middha, S. Xu, L. Li, M. Wu,J .J iang,
Q. Hu, Z. Fu, B. Liu, Adv.F unct. Mater. 2019, 29,1 907093;d )X .
Li, L. Liu, S. Li, Y. Wan, J.-X. Chen, S. Tian, Z. Huang,Y .-F.
Xiao,X .C ui, C. Xiang,Q .T an, X.-H. Zhang,W .G uo,X .-J.
Liang,C .-S.L ee, ACSN ano 2019, 13,1 2901 –1 2911.
[78] a) E. R. Kay,D .A .L eigh, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2015, 54,
10080 –1 0088; Angew.C hem. 2015, 127,1 0218 –1 0226;b )J .F .
Stoddart, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56,1 1094 –1 1125; Angew.
Chem. 2017, 129,1 1244 –1 1277;c )J .P .S auvage, Angew.C hem.
Int. Ed. 2017, 56,1 1080 –1 1093; Angew.C hem. 2017, 129,1 1228 –
11242;d )S .K assem, T. van Leeuwen, A. S. Lubbe,M .R .
Wilson, B. L. Feringa, D. A. Leigh, Chem. Soc.R ev. 2017, 46,
2592 –2 621.
[79] M. Jin, T. S. Chung,T .S eki, H. Ito,M .A .G arcia-Garibay, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2017, 139,1 8115 –1 8121.
[80] X. Luo,J .L i, C. Li, L. Heng,Y .Q .D ong,Z .L iu, Z. Bo,B .Z .
Tang, Adv.M ater. 2011, 23,3 261 –3 265.
[81] P. Alam, N. L. C. Leung, Y. Cheng,H .Z hang,J .L iu, W. Wu,
R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung,I .D .W illiams,B .Z .
Tang, Angew.C hem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58,4 536 –4 540; Angew.
Chem. 2019, 131,4 584 –4 588.
[82] a) Y. Diao,L .S haw,Z .B ao,S .C .B .M annsfeld, Energy Environ.
Sci. 2014, 7,2 145 –2 159;b )C .W ang,H .D ong,L .J iang, W. Hu,
Chem. Soc.R ev. 2018, 47,4 22 –5 00;c )S .I zawa, K. Nakano,K .
Suzuki, Y.Chen, T. Kikitsu, D. Hashizume,T .K oganezawa,T .-Q.
Nguyen, K. Tajima, Sci. Rep. 2018, 8,4 81.
[83] P.A. Alexander, Y. He,Y .C hen, J. Orban, P.N. Bryan, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009, 106,2 1149 –2 1154.
[84] a) Y. Gu, Z. Zhao,H .S u, P.Zhang,J .L iu, G. Niu, S. Li, Z. Wang,
R. T. K. Kwok, X.-L. Ni, J. Sun, A. Qin, W. Y. Lam, B. Z. Tang,
Chem. Sci. 2018, 9,6 497 –6 502;b )T .H e, H. Wang,Z .C hen, S.
Liu, J. Li, S. Li, ACSA ppl. Bio Mater. 2018, 1,6 36 –6 42;c )T .H e,
N. Niu, Z. Chen, S. Li, S. Liu, J. Li, Adv.F unct. Mater. 2018, 28,
1706196;d )B .L i, X. Xie,Z .C hen, C. Zhan, F. Zeng,S .W u, Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2018, 28,1 800692;e )Z .M a, C. Liu, N. Niu, Z.
Chen, S. Li, S. Liu, J. Li, ACSS ustainable Chem. Eng. 2018, 6,
3169 –3 175.
[85] Z. Qiu, W. Zhao,M .C ao,Y .W ang,J .W .Y .L am, Z. Zhang,X .
Chen, B. Z. Tang, Adv.M ater. 2018, 30,1 803924.
[86] a) W. Li, Y. Ding,M .T ebyetekerwa, Y. Xie,L .W ang,H .L i, R.
Hu, Z. Wang,A .Q in, B. Z. Tang, Mater.C hem. Front. 2019, 3,
2491 –2 498;b )W .Y ao,M .T ebyetekerwa, X. Bian, W. Li, S.
Yang,M .Z hu, R. Hu, Z. Wang,A .Q in, B. Z. Tang, J. Mater.
Chem. C 2018, 6,1 2849 –1 2857.
[87] a) Z. Zhao,Z .W ang,J .T avakoli, Z. Yu,P .C hen, Y. Xiong,Y .
Tang,J .W .Y .L am, B. Z. Tang, ChemRxiv Preprint, 2019 https://
doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.8796098.v2;b )W .S un, L. Luo,Y .
Feng,Y .C ai, Y. Zhuang,R .-J.X ie,X .C hen, H. Chen, Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 2020, 59,h ttps://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201908712;
Angew.C hem. 2020, 132,h ttps://doi.org/10.1002/ange.
201908712.
[88] M. M. S. Lee,L .Z heng,B .Y u, W. Xu, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y.
Lam, F. Xu, D. Wang,B .Z .T ang, Mater.C hem. Front. 2019, 3,
1454 –1 461.
[89] J. Kalia, R. T. Raines, Curr.O rg. Chem. 2010, 14,1 38 –1 47.
[90] B. He,H .S u, T. Bai, Y. Wu,S .L i, M. Gao,R .H u, Z. Zhao,A .
Qin, J. Ling,B .Z .T ang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139,5 437 –5 443.
[91] a) X. Chen, R. Hu, C. Qi, X. Fu, J. Wang,B .H e, D. Huang,A .
Qin, B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules 2019, 52,4 526 –4 533;b )J .
Huang,X .J iang, ACSA ppl. Mater.I nterfaces 2018, 10,3 61 –3 70;
c) Y. Shi, T. Bai, W. Bai, Z. Wang,M .C hen, B. Yao, J. Z. Sun, A.
Qin, J. Ling,B .Z .T ang, Chem. Eur.J . 2017, 23,1 0725 –1 0731;
d) D. Huang,Y .L iu, S. Guo,B .L i, J. Wang,B .Y ao,A .Q in, B. Z.
Tang, Polym. Chem. 2019, 10,3 088 –3 096.
[92] X. Hu, X. Zhao,B .H e, Z. Zhao,Z .Z heng,P .Z hang,X .S hi,
R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin, B. Z. Tang, Research 2018,
3152870.
Manuscript received:D ecember 31, 2019
Acceptedm anuscript online: February 11, 2020
Version of record online: May 14, 2020
Angewandte
ChemieReviews
9907Angew.C hem. Int.E d. 2020, 59,9 888 –9 907 T 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &C o. KGaA, Weinheim www.angewandte.org
 15213773, 2020, 25, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201916729 by <Shibboleth>-member@library.princeton.edu, Wiley Online Library on [31/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License