2101500 (1 of 11) © 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
www.advmat.de
ReseaRch aRticle
Hydrophilicity-Hydrophobicity Transformation, 
Thermoresponsive Morphomechanics, and Crack 
Multifurcation Revealed by AIEgens in Mechanically Strong 
Hydrogels
Yubing Hu, Lucile Barbier, Zhao Li, Xiaofan Ji, Heiva Le Blay, Dominique Hourdet, 
Nicolas Sanson, Jacky W. Y. Lam,* Alba Marcellan,* and Ben Zhong Tang*
Dr. Y . B. Hu, Dr. Z. Li, Prof. X. F. Ji, Dr. J. W. Y . Lam, Prof. B. Z. Tang
Department of Chemistry
the Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center 
for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction
Institute for Advanced Study
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macro Joint Laboratory of Optoelectronic  
and Magnetic Functional Materials
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, China
E-mail: chjacky@ust.hk; tangbenz@ust.hk
Dr. Y . B. Hu, Dr. J. W. Y . Lam, Prof. B. Z. Tang
HKUST-Shenzhen Research Institute
No. 9 Yuexing 1st RD, South Area, Hi-tech Park  
Nanshan, Shenzhen 518057, China
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202101500
and imply hydrogel integration into bio-
medical devices, [1]  soft actuators, [2]  or 
bioelectronics[3]  that require demanding 
mechanical behavior. Mechanical weak-
nesses of synthetic hydrogels, in terms of 
fracture stiffness, toughness, adhesion, or  
excessive swelling, are often addressed as 
limitation factor to practical development. 
In contrast, living matter has optimized 
the tissues with diverse hierarchical com-
partmentalized structure and adjustable 
mechanical properties to realize their 
functionalities in a changing environ-
ment.
[4]  Many forced-related biological 
tissues, such as spider silk, muscle, and 
tendon, are assembled from a variety of 
ordered protein fibers in aqueous media 
and exhibit intricate adaptive swelling 
and mechanical behaviors under stimuli. 
Moreover, these fibrillar soft tissues 
develop extremely high fracture tough-
ness (given their high water content) and 
demonstrate an intriguing damage behavior by tearing along 
the interfaces between fibers under excessive tension to pre-
vent injury to the entire tissue (Figure 1a).
[5–8]  From a structural 
perspective, dynamic noncovalent interactions and conforma-
tional variations of proteins play a crucial role in their strong 
Biomimetic exploration of stimuli-responsive and crack-resistant hydrogels is of 
great academic and practical significance, although the rational design of tough 
hydrogels is limited by insufficient mechanism study due to the lack of imaging 
techniques to “see” hydrogels at mesoscale level. A series of composite hydro-
gels with compartmentalized thermal response is designed by incorporating 
aggregation- and polarity-sensitive fluorescent probes in a poly(N-isopropy-
lacrylamide) (PNIPAM) network grafted with poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide) 
side-chains. The fluorescence technique is explored as a powerful tool to 
directly visualize their hydrophilicity-hydrophobicity transformation and the 
composition-dependent microphase separation. Based on the morphological 
observation and mechanical measurements, the concept of morphomechanics 
with a comprehensive mechanism clarification is proposed. In this regard, the 
thermoresponsive toughening is attributed to the formation of multiple non-
covalent interactions and the conformational changes of PNIPAM chains. The 
enhanced fracture energy by crack multifurcation is related to the tearing-like 
disruption of weak interfaces between the separated phases.
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202101500.
L. Barbier, H. L. Blay, Prof. D. Hourdet, Dr. N. Sanson, Dr. A. Marcellan
Soft Matter Sciences and Engineering
ESPCI Paris
PSL Research University, Sorbonne Universités
Laboratoire Sciences et Ingénierie de la Matière Molle CNRS
10 Rue Vauquelin, Paris 75005, France
E-mail: alba.marcellan@espci.fr
Prof. B. Z. Tang
Center for Aggregation-Induced Emission
SCUT-HKUST Joint Research Institute
State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou 510640, China
Prof. B. Z. Tang
AIE institute
Guangzhou Development Distinct, Huangpu, Guangzhou 510530, China
1. Introduction
Wet and soft matter is ubiquitous in nature. In living matter, 
structure and function are intimately linked to the environment. 
Many recent technologies are based on hydrogel responsiveness  
Adv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (2 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.com
and tunable mechanical properties. [9,10]  Although a deep under-
standing of the relationship between their molecular structure, 
supramolecular interactions, and mechanical behavior remains 
a big challenge, it is still fascinating for synthetic scientists and 
engineers to develop bioinspired high-strength and stimuli-
responsive hydrogels.
[11]
To meet the ever-increasing requirements, continuous 
effort has been devoted to the development of high-strength 
hydrogels.
[12,13]  Among them, the design original polymer 
network topologies, as double-networks, [14]  sliding-ring net-
works,[15]  tetra-poly(ethylene glycol) networks, [16]  or the intro-
duction of structural and dynamical heterogeneities, as in 
nanocomposite gels,
[17,18]  have shown significant mechanical 
enhancement than their conventional counterparts. Despite 
these great achievements, biomimetic approach can offer 
a broad platform to explore energy dissipation pathways for 
crack-resistant hydrogels.
[19,20]  Recently, protein-inspired 
phase-separated hydrogels have been proved to enhance the 
toughness of polymer networks.
[21,22]  A systematic crack 
bifurcation has been also reported to prevent crack fracture 
of the whole phase-separated hydrogels, which is promising 
to mimic the tearing behavior in hydrogels (Figure 1b).
[23]  To 
describe such behavior of sacrificing the noncovalent inter -
actions or weak interfaces to preserve the integrity of the 
whole, morphomechanics is proposed here to draw on the 
mechanical breakage of intramolecular bonds in mechano-
chemistry.
[24]  While the network topology and fiber-like forma-
tion of phase-separated domains, appears to be a key-aspect 
on fracture toughness enhancement,
[25,26]  the observation of 
the phase separation morphology and the understanding of 
the strengthening mechanism are still insufficient. Moreover, 
the current understanding of toughening scenarios is often 
deduced from the chemical nature of network structure and 
the macroscopic properties.
[27–29]  So far, the coupling effects 
due to noncovalent interactions and morphological structures 
on the mechanical property are still under debate due to the 
lack of mesoscale imaging techniques. It appears essential to 
develop effective techniques to “see” the mesoscale morpholo-
gies in various hydrated states and to clarify their roles in frac-
ture toughening.
[30,31]
In this framework, many modern microscopic techniques 
including scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron 
microscopy, and atomic force microscopy are inadequate. These 
cost and time-consuming imaging techniques are generally per-
formed in a vacuum state and have destructive sample prepara-
tion processes. On the contrary, fluorescence technique offers a 
direct approach to visualize the analytes in a simple, sensitive, 
high-contrast, and onsite manner. However, many traditional 
fluorophores exhibit weak or no emission in the solid state and 
aqueous environment due to the aggregation-caused quenching 
effect.
[32]  Fortunately, this negative effect can be overcome by 
luminogens (AIEgens) with aggregation-induced emission 
(AIE), which are generally non-emissive in dilute solutions 
but emit intensely in the aggregated state due to the restric-
tion of intramolecular motions.
[33]  AIEgens are often embedded 
with electron-donating (D) and accepting (A) units to trigger 
polarity-responsive emission change assisted by the twisted 
intramolecular charge transfer (TICT) effect.
[34]  Herein, we 
developed a new polymerizable fluorescent probe with AIE and 
TICT characters for the direct visualization of microphase sepa-
ration patterns and hydrophilicity-hydrophobicity transforma-
tion in thermoresponsive composite hydrogels. Combined with 
their mechanical behaviors, thermoresponsive toughening, 
and crack multi-bifurcation, we gain a deep understanding of 
their structure–property relationships and propose a detailed 
strengthening mechanism of hydrogels.
2. Results and Discussions
2.1. Fluorescent Probe with Response to Aggregation  
and Polarity Change
To visualize the morphological change of stimuli-responsive 
hydrogels, we designed and synthesized a new water-soluble 
AIEgen named TVPA with the chemical structure shown in 
Figure 2a. The electron-donating triphenylamine and the elec-
tron-withdrawing pyridinium unit are connected to the eth-
ylene core, which endows TVPA with molecular rotors, a D−A 
structure, and ionic character. The three-step synthetic route is 
provided in Figure S1, Supporting Information. The reaction 
intermediates and TVPA were fully characterized by NMR and 
mass spectroscopies (Figure S2−S9, Supporting Information). 
The theoretical frontier molecular orbital distribution was cal-
culated by density functional theory calculations [m062x/6-311G 
(d, p)]. As shown in Figure 2a, the highest occupied molecular 
orbital (HOMO) mainly localizes in the triphenylamine unit 
and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) mainly 
locates in the pyridinium unit. Such electron separation of 
HOMO and LUMO indicates a π–π* transition with a charge 
transfer character.
The photoluminescence (PL) and the quantum yields 
(QYs) in water, glycerol, and the solid state of TVPA were first 
investigated to verify the desired optical properties. As shown 
in Figure 2b, the water-soluble TVPA exhibits weak red emis-
sion in dilute aqueous solution but emits intensely in viscous 
glycerol and in the solid state with 87 and 54 times higher 
intensity, respectively. The corresponding QYs of TVPA are 
also increased from 0.4% to 10.7% and 6.1%, respectively, 
Adv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
Figure 1. Biomimetic design of high-strength hydrogels. a) Simplified 
tearing model of fibrillar soft tissues[5–8]  under excessive tension. b) Bioin-
spired design for crack-resistant hydrogels by deflecting the fracture along 
the stretching axis through crack bifurcation.
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (3 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.com
confirming the AIE characteristic of TVPA because of the 
restriction of intramolecular motions. Considering the D− A 
structure of TVPA, we recorded its PL spectra and fluores-
cent photos in different solvents and polymer films with 
various polarities. Figure  2c demonstrates the remarkable 
solvatochromic effect of TVPA: its emission color gradu-
ally shifts from blue (λ
em = 436 nm) to red (λ em = 610 nm) 
when the solvent is changed from non-polar toluene to 
polar methanol. The TVPA-doped polymer films also dis-
play the same bathochromic shift from blue emission (λ
em = 
457 nm) in non-polar polybutadiene to red emission (λ em = 
621 nm) in polar PEG (Figure  2d). Such polarity-responsive 
behaviors clearly manifest the TICT characteristic of TVPA. 
In short, we successfully synthesized a AIEgen with desired 
strong emission in the aggregated state and high sensi-
tivity to environmental polarity. From synthetic prospective, 
acrylate-containing TVPA probe is promising to be covalently 
incorporated in polymer network by olefinic polymerization 
in aqueous media. Such characteristics make it a promising 
fluorescent sensor to the crowdedness and polarity change in 
macromolecular systems.
2.2. Fluorescent Response in Stimuli-Responsive Hydrogels
Based on the previous efforts in phase-separated hydrogels, we 
attempted to incorporate TVPA in the chemically crosslinked 
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) network grafted with 
poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide) (PDMA) side-chains as schemat-
ically illustrated in Figure 3a. The PDMA macromonomer was 
synthesized according to the procedure reported in Figure S10,  
Supporting Information. Gels synthesis was carried out in  
water. 2 mm thick hydrogel plates were prepared by free rad   ical 
copolymerization of NIPAM, TVPA, PDMA macromono   mer, and 
N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (MBA) as chemical crosslinker 
using a redox initiation at room temperature with potassium 
Adv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
Figure 2. Chemical structure and photophysical response of TVPA probe. a) Chemical structure of TVPA and its theoretical calculated molecular orbital 
amplitude plots of HOMO and LUMO. b) PL spectra of TVPA in water (10 µM), viscous glycerol (10 µM), and the solid state. Inset: The corresponding 
fluorescent photographs and quantum yield (QY) of TVPA. Fluorescent photographs and PL spectra of TVPA c) in solvents with different polarities: 
toluene, acetone, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and methanol (MeOH) and d) in spin-coated polymer films with various polarities: polybutadiene (PB), 
polystyrene (PS), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG).
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (4 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.com
peroxodisulfate and N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine. 
We anticipated that the copolymer network can alternate 
from the as-prepared homogeneous state at room tempera-
ture to a biphasic state under thermal stimulus above the 
lower critical solution temperature of PNIPAM (LCST, T
c ≈ 
32 °C) and back to the homogeneous state below the LCST. [35]  
Indeed, the well-hydrated PNIPAM chains should undergo 
a coil-to-globule transition and collapse into PNIPAM-rich 
hydrophobic domains above the LCST. At the same time, 
the water released is absorbed by the hydrophilic PDMA 
phase which thus makes it possible to preserve the swelling 
of the gel (as polymer concentration) at macroscopic scale by 
osmotic contribution. Thus, from preparation state, gels can  
undergo microphase separation at almost constant macro-
scopic volume for T  > T
c. Meanwhile, the covalently incorpo-
rated TVPA is expected to exhibit fluorescence in terms of 
both intensity and color changes, from weakly red-emissive in 
the extended hydrophilic PNIPAM chains to intensively blue-
emissive in the crowded hydrophobic PNIPAM-rich domains. 
Using this design principle, three hydrogels (GN2D3, GN3D3, 
and GN6D3) were achieved from N-isopropylacrylamide 
(NIPAM,N) network and grafted PDMA macromonomers 
(D) with different weight ratios (N/D: 2/3, 3/3, and 6/3)  
while keeping the same PNIPAm network (content and cross-
link density) (Figure S11 and Table S1, Supporting Informa-
tion). For comparison purposes, GN and GD hydrogels were  
Adv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
Figure 3. Schematic illustration of design principle and visualization of hydrophilicity-hydrophobicity transformation in aqueous medium. a) TVPA 
was incorporated into the crosslinked NIPAM polymer network by free radical polymerization of NIPAM, TVPA, PDMA macromonomer, and MBA 
crosslinker. The collapse of the resulting PNIPAM network is induced above its transition temperature (Tc) and the emission of the incorporated TVPA 
is expected to be enhanced and blue-shifted in the crowded and hydrophobic PNIPAM domains. Three hydrogels were prepared with different weight 
fractions of NIPAM and PDMA. b–d, PL spectra of TVPA-incorporated b) GN2D3, GN3D3, and GN6D3, c) GD and d) GN hydrogels at 20 and 60 °C 
in water (λ
ex  = 380 nm). Inset: fluorescent photos of hydrogels at 20 and 60 °C taken under 365 nm UV light. Fluorescent photos of various hydrogels 
with stimuli-responsive gelation. e) PEG-PPG-PEG solution is gelled at 40 °C and its thermoresponsive emission color is gradually blue-shifted with 
increasing temperature. f) A mixture of PEG and α-CD solutions is gelled after the complex formation for 24 h. g) Chitosan solution (pH 5.6) is gelled 
upon the addition of sodium hydroxide solution (0.01 M).
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (5 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.com
prepared from NIPAM and N ,N-dimethylacrylamide with 
TVPA, respectively.
The macroscopic properties of three hydrogels were investi-
gated at different temperatures by swelling experiments, trans-
mittance, and PL measurements. Starting from the as-prepared 
(reference) state, as expected, the three hydrogels largely swell 
when equilibrated in water at 20 °C and the level of swelling 
at equilibrium increases with the PDMA content (Figure S12, 
Supporting Information). In comparison, the swelling of hydro-
gels equilibrated at 60 °C remains closer to the reference state, 
either above, similar, or below for GN2D3, GN3D3, and GN6D3, 
respectively. Such swelling behavior implies that they success-
fully inherit the thermoresponsive properties from LCST-type 
PNIPAM and their swelling ability is tunable by changing the 
weight fraction of PNIPAM and PDMA. From the absorption 
spectra, the change in transmittance at 600 nm was determined 
as a function of temperature between 20 and 60 °C (Figure S13, 
Supporting Information). For all the samples, GN2D3, GN3D3, 
and GN6D3, the transmittance drops dramatically between 24 
and 34 °C with a visible change from transparent to opaque. 
This macroscopic observation, common to the three hydrogels, 
clearly indicates the transition from homogeneous to hetero-
geneous system due the formation of PNIPAM-rich domains 
above their LCST.
[36]
As the incorporation of TVPA into the hydrogels provides 
direct access to the fluorescence technique in hydrogels, we 
carefully studied the PL of the three hydrogels in the prepara-
tion state and after heating in water for 30 min. As indicated in 
Figure  3b, all the PL spectra of GN2D3, GN3D3, and GN6D3 
display remarkable both intensity and color changes at T
c. By 
heating from 20 to 60 °C, the PL intensity increases by up to 
17 times and the PL maximum shifts from 620 to 480 nm. The 
reversible fluorescence change between dark orange (20 °C) 
and bright blue (60 °C) is observable by naked eyes. Among 
the three hydrogels, GN6D3 with the highest composition of 
PNIPAM shows strongest intensity enhancement owing to 
its slight macroscopic shrinkage. GN2D3 has the largest blue 
shift to 470 nm, which indicates that PNIPAM chains have col-
lapsed into strongly dehydrated and dense domains. To better 
understand the source of fluorescence change, we studied the 
PL of GN and GD at 20 and 60 °C. As shown in Figure 3c,d, the 
temperature only exerts a strong influence on the fluorescence 
of GN. The emission color of GN at the temperature above 
T
c is close to that of traditional non-polar polymers. Refer -
ring to the AIE and TICT characteristics of TVPA probe, such 
enhanced and blue-shifted fluorescence underlines the coil-to-
globule conformational change and implies the transformation 
from hydrophilic PNIPAM chains into hydrophobic PNIPAM 
domains above the LCST. In other words, TVPA can serve as a 
simple and effective reporter to micro-environmental changes 
in hydrogels, especially to the transformation from molecular 
hydrophilicity to morphological hydrophobicity.
To demonstrate this newly proposed concept, additional 
proof-of-concept experiments were performed on stimuli-
responsive gelation of TVPA-containing synthetic polymers, 
synthetic-natural complex and natural polymers. In Figure 3e, 
the thermo-responsive gelation of poly(ethylene glycol)-block-
poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-PPG-
PEG) solution displays a gradual blue-shifted emission when 
its aqueous solution is heated, traducing dehydration level. A 
mixture of weakly red-emissive α-cyclodextrin (α-CD) and PEG 
solutions turns into a hydrogel after the formation of an inclu-
sion complex α-CD-PEG, which exhibits a strong orange emis-
sion (Figure 3f). Again, with the diffusion of sodium hydroxide, 
the chitosan solution gradually gels with the shift of the emis-
sion color from red to orange (Figure  3g). Collectively, these 
emission behaviors show that TVPA can sensitively detect both 
environmental concentration and polarity changes, respectively 
by intensity and color-shift emission, taking place in stimuli-
responsive hydrogels. More generally, the TVPA probe allows 
for probing the hydrophilic-hydrophobic transformation in bio-
logical macromolecular systems and would make it possible to 
assess the transition level through the polarity of the environ-
ment as a function of the emission color.
2.3. Fluorescent Imaging of Microphase Separated Hydrogels
Based on the preliminary results, the fluorescence micro-
scope was employed to systematically investigate the ther -
moresponsive morphology of the hydrogels at the mesoscopic 
scale (Figure S14, Supporting Information). The GN3D3 
hydrogel, selected as representative sample for the analysis of 
thermal effect, was studied a) in the preparation state, b) after 
immersing in water at 60 °C for 30 min, and c) after overnight 
recovery at 20 °C, respectively. Under thermal cycling, fluores-
cent images of GN3D3 switch reversibly between chromatic-
orange and chromatic-blue emission, which is consistent with 
the macroscopic observation. The appearance of Newton’s rings 
with multicolor fringes illustrates the existence of light inter -
ference. By applying simple optics principles,
[37]  we can draw 
two guidelines: 1) the numbers of interference fringes in New-
ton’s rings are positively correlated with the actual size of the 
corresponding objects; 2) the distance between two construc-
tive fringes of same color, called as fringe spacing, depends 
on the refractive index of local polymer domains. The role of 
light interference in the optical observation of the fluorescent 
composite hydrogels is interpretated in detail (Figure S15, Sup-
porting Information). The interference patterns in Figure 4a 
display continuous irregular combinations of Newton’s rings, 
which are associated with some spatial heterogeneities distri-
bution of partially hydrated polymer phase and aqueous phase 
trapped during polymerization.
[38]  Noted that a morphological 
pattern with two distinct regions in Figure  4b is generated by 
heating GN3D3 above the LCST while its volume change at the 
macroscopic level is almost negligible. Region I displays plenty 
of strongly emissive spherical domains, which result from the 
large difference in refractive index between polymer concen-
trated domains (PNIPAM-rich) and water (or highly hydrated 
polymer regions). Region II is a more uniform pattern dis-
playing weakly emissive matrix corresponding to the domains 
where the highly hydrated PDMA domains exhibit a refrac-
tive index comparable to water. Such assignment of region I 
and region II are supported by further comparison with the 
morphologies of GD and GN after immersing in water at  
60 °C (Figure S16, Supporting Information). After the thermal 
cycling, an entire Newton’s ring spreads over the entire area 
in the recovered pattern with relatively wide fringe spacing,  
Adv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (6 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.com
suggesting a more homogenous network produced by rehydra-
tion of PNIPAM domains and rearrangement of both PDMA 
and PNIPAM chains (Figure  4c). By immersing GN3D3 in 
water at different temperatures, the scale of phase transi-
tion and the size of PNIPAM-rich domains are continuously 
increasing from 25 to 65 °C (Figure S16, Supporting Informa-
tion). This series of interference patterns obtained by thermal 
cycling demonstrates the reliability of fluorescent observations 
and the reversibility of the system.
The fluorescence images of GN2D3, GN3D3, and GN6D3 
were then taken to compare the impact of gel topology over the 
microphase separation patterns. As presented in Figure  4d–i, 
the ratio of PNIPAM network and PDMA grafts exerts a great 
influence on the phase-separated morphologies. In GN2D3 
with PDMA as the major component, a uniform disper -
sion of the PDMA-rich matrix with isolated PNIPAM-rich 
spherical domains is observed (Figure  4d,g). From GN2D3 to 
GN3D3, the content of hydrophilic grafts is decreased, and the 
PNIPAM-rich spherical domains appear to be more intercon-
nected (Figure  4b,e,h). The picture for GN6D3 (Figure  4f,i) 
appears more complex with even larger polymer-rich domains 
interconnected. From the morphological changes, we deduce 
that the PNIPAM network collapses through the pearl necklace-
like formation of intrachain micelles and the spacer between 
micelles becomes closer as the content of hydrophilic PDMA 
grafts decreases. In fact, these phase-separated patterns pro-
vide good experimental evidence for the theoretical models of 
sparsely grafted amphiphilic copolymer self-assemblies.
[39]  In 
terms of Newton’s rings assigned to PNIAM-rich domains, the 
numbers of interference fringe and the fringe spacing gradu-
ally increase from GN2D3, GN3D3 to GN6D3. This suggests 
that the PNIPAM-core micelles become larger and more uni-
form with increasing composition of PNIPAM. These observa-
tions demonstrate that the AIE-assisted fluorescent imaging 
offers a simple, high-contrast, and onsite access to visualize 
stimuli-responsive morphological variations and differentiate 
the composition-dependent phase-separated patterns. In this 
way, fluorescence technique affords a new way of revealing 
mesostructures in hydrogels which had never been observed so 
far.
2.4. Mechanical Response and Fracture Mode of Fiber-Like Gels
After exploring the stimuli-responsive and composition-
dependent microphase separation of GN2D3, GN3D3, and 
GN6D3, we investigate the impact of such morphologies on 
the mechanical behavior. The temperature-induced viscoelastic 
properties were first studied under small deformations, probing 
the mechanical response of gel’s microstructure without strong 
perturbations from its conformation at rest. Note that samples 
were tested under isolated conditions, that is, immersed in par -
affin oil, to prevent water evaporation or swelling during experi-
ment. The frequency-dependence of their viscoelastic behaviors 
Adv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
Figure 4. Visualization of microphase separation by fluorescent microscopy. Fluorescent images of thermoresponsive hydrogels a) in the preparation 
state, b) after immersing in water at 60 °C, and c) after overnight recovery at room temperature using GN3D3 as a representative example. Fluorescence 
images of microphase-separated hydrogels of d,g) GN2D3, e,h) GN3D3, and f,i) GN6D3 after immersing in water at 60 °C for 30 min.
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (7 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.com
at 20 and 60 °C was examined to verify their temperature-
dependent viscoelastic moduli (Figure S17, Supporting Infor -
mation). Then the thermo-responsive mechanical properties at 
small deformations were measured by temperature sweep at a 
constant frequency (f  = 1 rad s −1 ). As illustrated in Figure 5a,  
heating the hydrogel samples from 20 to 60 °C triggers a dra-
matic increase of the elastic modulus (G′) corresponding to 
the emergence and progress of microphase separation, where 
the elastic PNIPAM network collapses into a stiffened phase. 
The rheological measurement under heating and cooling pro-
cess shows excellent superposition performance, implying the 
recovery and stability of the system at a slow rate of tempera-
ture change (0.25 °C min
−1 ). As expected from optical observa-
tion of phase-separated patterns, the addition of PDMA grafts 
implies a limitation of phase separation domains—from vir -
tually continuous to more isolated domains—and results in a 
decreased reinforcement efficiency, in terms of G′ for T  > T
c. 
Sufficiently far from Tc, the contribution of dissipative contribu-
tion remains quite low, the loss modulus (G′′) being one order 
of magnitude lower than G′.
We then investigated the large strain behaviors of GN2D3, 
GN3D3, and GN6D3 at 20 and 60 °C by tensile stress–strain 
measurements (Figure  5b–d and Figure S18 and S19, Sup-
porting Information). As shown in Figure  5b, at 20 °C, all 
Adv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
Figure 5. Thermoresponsive viscoelastic, large strain behavior and crack multifurcation. a) Temperature-dependent shear storage (solid symbols, G′) 
and loss (open symbols, G″) moduli of GN2D3 (black), GN3D3 (blue), and GN6D3 (red) with a heating/cooling rate of 0.25 °C min −1 . b) Tensile stress–
strain curves of GN2D3, GN3D3 and GN6D3 at 20 and 60 °C. c) Tensile moduli of GN2D3, GN3D3 and GN6D3 at 20 (yellow) and 60 °C (green) Inset: 
Microphase separation patterns referring to the actual situation. d) Plot of reduced stress versus 1/λ at 20 and 60 °C corresponding to the stress–strain 
curves in (b). e) Tensile stress–strain curves of GN2D3, GN3D3, and GN6D3 with pre-crack at 60 °C. f) Comparative analysis of fracture energies of 
pre-cracked hydrogels. Inset: Schematic diagram of crack furcation referring to the actual situation. Pictures taken during tensile tests of pre-cracked 
hydrogels in paraffin oil baths at 60 °C, which record the crack propagation and multifurcation process of g) GN2D3, h) GN3D3, and i) GN6D3.
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (8 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.com
the samples show the typical response of lightly covalently 
crosslinked polymer networks. Indeed, the PNIPAM network 
below T
c is supposed to feature entropy-driven elasticity. At  
20 °C, Young’s modulus (E) is rather similar, independently of 
network topologies, and the obtained values are in line with 
viscoelastic data (E  ≅ 3G′). Conversely, at 60 °C stress–strain 
curves significantly overestimate the purely entropic contri-
bution of the network at 20 °C. Such remarkable changes on  
fracture strain and stress are ascribed to the conformational 
entanglement of the collapsed PNIPAM chains and the formation 
of multiple noncovalent interactions in PNIPAM domains above 
LCST, respectively. GN6D3 displays the highest E of 18.3 kPa  
at 60 °C, which is consistent with the role of PNIPAM as a 
thick continuous matrix as observed at mesoscale. In addition, 
an interesting crack deflection occurs when stretching GN6D3 
to large strain (Figure S19, Supporting Information). To graphi-
cally depict their divergence from entropy-driven elasticity, 
stress–strain behaviors have been plotted as reduced stress 
versus reciprocal elongation (1/λ) according to semi-empirical 
model.
[40]  As shown in Figure  5d, the almost horizontal lines 
at 20 °C indicate that their original mechanical performance 
is dominated by entropic elasticity. In contrast, at 60 °C their 
reduced stress (1/λ) curves obviously deviate from entropic 
elasticity, displaying roughly softening and hardening behav-
iors. The softening behavior is contributed from the disrup-
tion of noncovalent interactions that dissipate energy during 
the unraveling of the collapsed PNIPAM network from globule 
conformation to stretched state. After the consumption of phys-
ical associations, the polymer chains are oriented and aligned 
along the stretching direction and account for the final hard-
ening behavior before fracture.
Tensile tests on notched specimen were performed at 60 °C  
to focus on the crack propagation and fracture toughening 
mechanisms. The notch was made with a razor blade to ini-
tiate the crack propagation where the notch induces high strain 
amplification. The tensile stress–strain curves are plotted in 
Figure  5e and the corresponding stretching processes are 
recorded using pictures (Figure 5g–i) and videos (Videos S1–S3,  
Supporting Information). All GNxDy topologies exhibit strong 
resistance to crack propagation by shielding the crack tip sin-
gularity: first by crack blunting, followed by systematic crack 
furcation perpendicularly to the plane of the notch. Interest-
ingly, pre-notched specimens in Figure 5e sustain higher frac-
ture stresses than their un-notched counterparts in Figure 5b, 
suggesting that toughening mechanisms are operating more 
efficiently under severe loading, as knotty-tearing fracture 
mode in natural rubbers.
[41]  As depicted in Figure  5g, GN2D3 
with pre-crack displays blunting and one crack deflection 
along the stretching direction. GN3D3 displays three consecu-
tive crack deflections and GN6D3 is further developed into 
crack multifurcation, that is, five crack branches are noticed 
(Figure  5h,i). This multifurcation behavior exactly mimics the 
tearing behavior of fibrillar tissues and inherits the advantage 
of keeping the integrity of the material as much as possible. In 
laminate materials, theoretical criterion for crack deflection is 
reached when the adhesive energy of the interface becomes less 
than the cohesive energy in a certain ratio.
[42]  In our case, as the 
composition of PNIPAM increases from GN2D3 to GN6D3, the 
cohesive energy of hydrogels is intensified and the opportunity 
of encountering the PNIPAM/PDMA interfaces along the crack 
path also raises. This explains the increasing process of crack 
multifurcation observed from GN2D3, GN3D3 to GN6D3. The 
fracture energies of notched specimens, which describe the 
strain energy required to propagate the crack across hydrogels, 
have been estimated in Figure  5f. With crack multifurcation, 
GN6D3 displays the highest fracture energy at around 800 J m
−2 .  
This is a quite high value considering the high hydration level 
of the gel, as the fracture energy for unfilled rubber is around 
1000 J m
−2 . The key-point, here, relies on multiple fracture sur -
face area that is generated during the failure process as addi-
tional energy dissipation pathway which resembles the fiber-
assembled biological tissues. Acquiring such ability to resist 
crack penetration and maintain the integrity of the entire body 
by partial sacrifice in strengthened hydrogels are of great sig-
nificance for material engineering and practical applications.
2.5. Mechanism Study
Based on the above studies, going from microscopic hydrophi-
licity-hydrophobicity transformation to mesoscopic morpholog-
ical variation and up to macroscopic mechanical performance, 
we propose a toughening mechanism as illustrated in Figure 6.  
So far, it has been widely accepted that the LCST behavior of 
PNIPAM is associated with the “hydrophobic interactions” of 
the hydrophobic backbone and isopropyl groups,
[43–45]  but this 
is a limited view. According to the microenvironmental polarity 
change indicated by TVPA probe, the PNIPAM network has 
completely transformed from hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity 
under thermal stimulus (Figure 6a). By analyzing the molecular 
structure of PNIPAM, the amide groups present favorable 
interactions with water molecules through hydrogen bonds 
at low temperature and promote water solubility of PNIPAM 
chains. However, above the LCST, the coil-to-globule transi-
tion generates the collapsed PNIPAM domains with extensive 
intra- and inter-chain hydrogen bonds between amide groups, 
which will occupy the previous hydrogen-bond acceptors or 
donors for water and make the whole PNIPAM domains water 
insoluble. The dehydration of C O and N H groups and the 
formation of new hydrogen bonds between amide groups are 
further proved by the temperature-dependent infrared spectro-
scopy measurements (Figure S20, Supporting Information). In 
this way, the PNIPAM domains are strengthened significantly 
due to the massive generation of noncovalent interactions, 
mainly including hydrogen bonds. Of course topological con-
straints implied by the distributions of network mesh-sizes and 
hydrophilic grafts make the morphology of the phase separa-
tion more complex.
Under uniaxial mechanical stretching, the strengthened 
phase-separated hydrogels gradually break noncovalent inter -
actions and dissipate the strain energy during the unraveling 
of the collapsed PNIPAM domains (Figure  6b). The orienta-
tion and alignment of polymer network with the reversible 
formation of new noncovalent interactions in highly stretched 
hydrogels, generate fiber-like structures and lead to an efficient 
resistance to crack propagation. Hence, the mechanical perfor -
mance of the stimuli-responsive phase-separated hydrogels is 
improved just by heating when the macroscopic volume change 
Adv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (9 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.comAdv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
is balanced by the swelling of PDMA domains. The role of 
fiber-like microphase separation is well demonstrated in ten-
sile mode on pre-notched specimens. As shown in Figure  6c, 
the crack propagation along the horizontal direction is blocked 
when the crack tip meets a weak interface between PNIPAM 
and PDMA phases. Since the adhesive energy of PNIPAM/
PDMA interfaces is incomparable to the cohesive energy, the 
crack deflects along the vertical stretching direction. Mean-
while, the concentrated tensile stress activates the chain orien-
tation and alignment around the initial crack tip where strain 
amplification takes place. In contrast, the weaker areas at the 
edges of the hydrogel are cracked into additional notches, prob-
ably in the PDMA-rich swollen phase. In other words, the heter-
ogeneous distribution of dense polymer-rich domains and weak 
highly hydrated phases promotes the formation of tearing-like 
crack multifurcation phenomenon, which efficiently enlarges 
the mechanical strain energy required to propagate the crack 
across the sample. Furthermore, the composition-dependence 
of the crack multifurcation is related to the thickness and the 
interface to volume ratio of fibrillar structures, which is pre-
dictable from their microphase separation patterns. Briefly, the 
above-mentioned mechanical behaviors of sacrificing the non-
covalent interactions or weak interfaces between two separated 
phases in order to retard the fracture failure and preserve the 
integrity of the whole exactly match the proposed concept of 
morphomechanics.
3. Conclusion
In summary, we have successfully realized the direct visuali-
zation at mesoscale level of microphase separation with easy  
Figure 6. Proposed mechanism for thermoresponsive toughening and crack multifurcation. a) The reversible transformation of molecular hydrophi-
licity and morphological hydrophobicity during thermally induced hydration and dehydration of PNIPAM network. The previous hydrogen bond accep-
tors in PNIPAM for water molecules are occupied by intra and interchain hydrogen bonds above the LCST. b) Disruption of noncovalent interactions, 
mainly hydrogen bonds, contributes to the strain energy dissipation during the disentanglement of collapsed PNIPAM network. The regained nonco-
valent interactions during the orientation and alignment of the highly stretched PNIPAM network also reinforce the tensile strength before fracture.  
c) Proposed multifurcation mechanism of microphase separated hydrogels induced by pre-crack. Pre-crack propagates until it meets the weak interface 
of PDMA-rich (light grey) and PNIPAM-rich (dark grey) phases and induces crack deflection along the stretching direction. Increasing fracture surface 
area by crack multifurcation retards the fracture and enlarges fracture energy.
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (10 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.comAdv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
differentiation of hydrophobic collapsed PNIPAM domains in 
gels by developing a fluorescent indicator with both AIE and 
TICT characters that can be easily integrated into the PNIPAM 
network by polymerization in aqueous medium. The presence 
of hydrophilic macromonomer grafts in the network prevents 
the macroscopic collapse of the hydrogel and helps the genera-
tion of hierarchical fibrillary structures. The microphase sepa-
ration can be readily identified at the mesoscale as spherical 
domains with different interconnected modes in a facile, high-
contrast, and noninvasive manner. These observations under 
fluorescence microscopy revealed dense and hydrophobic mes-
ostructures which had never been observed so far.
The overall mechanism study has been well summarized 
by the proposed concept of morphomechanics. In contrast to 
the general understanding of “hydrophobic interactions,” the 
transformation from molecular hydrophilicity to morphological 
hydrophobicity has been attributed to the formation of multiple 
non-covalent interactions. The universality of these transfor -
mations by several stimuli-responsive sol-gel transitions, such 
concept could meet interests on materials science and biology 
communities. The crack multifurcation has been associated the 
fibrillary structures by direct observation of microphase separa-
tion patterns, which provides an additional energy dissipation 
pathway and enhances fracture energy. The mesoscopic explo-
ration of stimuli-responsive materials remains a key-point to 
the design of high-strength gels or more biomimetic materials. 
For instance, for a better understanding of how biopolymers 
regulate their inter and intra assemblies via phase transition to 
perform various biological functions such as reaction accelera-
tion, signal transduction, and transcriptional regulation.
[46]
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or 
from the author.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the financial support from the National 
Science Foundation of China (21788102, 21490570, and 21490574), 
the Research Grant Council of Hong Kong (16305618, 16304819, 
N-HKUST609/19, and C6009-17G), the Science and Technology Plan 
of Shenzhen (JCYJ20160229205601482, JCYJ20170818113602462, 
JCYJ20180306180231853, and JCYJ 20180306174910791), the Innovation 
and Technology Commission (ITC-CNERC14SC01), and National Key 
Research and Development Program of China (2018YFE0190200), 
and ESPCI Paris – Sorbonne Université—CNRS. Y .B.H. also thanks 
Mohamed Hanafi, Guylaine Ducouret, Xiaolin Liu, Junkai Liu, Louis 
Debertrand, Zuxiang Xu, and Qingyun Li for their technical assistance.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Author Contributions
A.M. and B.Z.T. initiated the international collaboration to study the inner 
structure and mechanical mechanism of hydrogels. Y .B.H. proposed this 
specific idea, performed all experiments, and wrote the manuscript. A.M. 
and B.Z.T. provided their kind guidance and financial support. D.H., 
N.S., J.W.Y .L., and A.M. offered many suggestions for the revisions of 
manuscript. L.B., Z.L., X.F.J., and H.L.B. taught the experimental details 
to Y .B.H. from synthesis to mechanical measurement.
Data Availability Statement
The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the 
Supporting Information of this article.
Keywords
aggregation-induced emission, crack multifurcation, hydrophilicity-
hydrophobicity transformation, microphase separation
Received: February 22, 2021
Revised: May 21, 2021
Published online: 
[1] S. I.  Park, D. S.  Brenner, G.  Shin, C. D.  Morgan, B. A.  Copits,  
H. U. Chung, M. Y . Pullen, K. N. Noh, S. Davidson, S. J. Oh, Nat. 
Biotechnol. 2015, 33, 1280.
[2] M.  Wehner, R. L.  Truby, D. J.  Fitzgerald, B.  Mosadegh,  
G. M. Whitesides, J. A. Lewis, R. J. Wood, Nature 2016, 536, 451.
[3] H. Yuk, B. Lu, X. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019, 48, 1642.
[4] W.  Huang, D.  Restrepo, J. Y .  Jung, F. Y .  Su, Z.  Liu, R. O.  Ritchie, 
J.  McKittrick, P.  Zavattieri, D.  Kisailus, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31,  
1901561.
[5] C. Riekel, C. Craig, M. Burghammer, M. Müller, Naturwissenschaften 
2001, 88, 67.
[6] J. E. Muscolino, Kinesiology-E-Book: The Skeletal System and Muscle 
Function, Elsevier Health Sciences, Amsterdam 2014.
[7] R.  Bahr, S.  Mæhlum, Clinical Guide to Sports Injuries, Human 
Kinetics, Champaign, IL 2004.
[8] P. K. Hansma, G. E. Fantner, J. H. Kindt, P. J. Thurner, G. Schitter, 
P. J.  Turner, S. F.  Udwin, M. M.  Finch, J. Musculoskeletal Neuronal 
Interact. 2005, 5, 313.
[9] T. Scheibel, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2005, 16, 427.
[10] M. J. Buehler, S. Keten, Nano Res. 2008, 1, 63.
[11] U. G. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia, R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater. 
2015, 14, 23.
[12] C. W.  Peak, J. J.  Wilker, G.  Schmidt, Colloid Polym. Sci. 2013, 291, 
2031.
[13] X. Zhao, Soft Matter 2014, 10, 672.
[14] J. P. Gong, Y . Katsuyama, T. Kurokawa, Y . Osada, Adv. Mater. 2003, 
15, 1155.
[15] Y . Okumura, K. Ito, Adv. Mater. 2001, 13, 485.
[16] T. Sakai, T. Matsunaga, Y . Yamamoto, C. Ito, R. Yoshida, S. Suzuki, 
N.  Sasaki, M.  Shibayama, U.-i.  Chung, Macromolecules 2008, 41, 
5379.
[17] S. v.  Rose, A.  Dizeux, T.  Narita, D.  Hourdet, A.  Marcellan, Macro-
molecules 2013, 46, 4095.
[18] K. Haraguchi, T. Takehisa, Adv. Mater. 2002, 14, 1120.
[19] J. Kopeček, Biomaterials 2007, 28, 5185.
[20] J. S. Mohammed, W. L. Murphy, Adv. Mater. 2009, 21, 2361.
[21] T.  Nonoyama, Y . W.  Lee, K.  Ota, K.  Fujioka, W.  Hong, J. P.  Gong, 
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 1905878.
[22] J. L. Holloway, A. M. Lowman, G. R. Palmese, Soft Matter 2013, 9 , 826.
[23] H. Guo, N. Sanson, D. Hourdet, A. Marcellan, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 
5857.
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH2101500 (11 of 11)
www.advmat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.comAdv. Mater. 2021, 2101500
[24] S. L.  James, C. J.  Adams, C.  Bolm, D.  Braga, P.  Collier, T.  Friščić, 
F. Grepioni, K. D. Harris, G. Hyett, W. Jones, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 
41, 413.
[25] C.  Mussault, H.  Guo, N.  Sanson, D.  Hourdet, A.  Marcellan, Soft 
Matter 2019, 15, 8653.
[26] H.  Guo, C.  Mussault, A.  Brûlet, A.  Marcellan, D.  Hourdet, 
N. Sanson, Macromolecules 2016, 49, 4295.
[27] Q. Chen, H. Chen, L. Zhu, J. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. B 2015, 3, 3654.
[28] B.  Wu, W.  Chassé, R.  Peters, T.  Brooijmans, A. A.  Dias, A.  Heise,  
C. J.  Duxbury, A. P.  Kentgens, D. F.  Brougham, V. M.  Litvinov,  
Macromolecules 2016, 49, 6531.
[29] E.  Ducrot, Y .  Chen, M.  Bulters, R. P.  Sijbesma, C.  Creton, Science 
2014, 344, 186.
[30] K. Li, Y . Lin, C. Lu, Chem. - Asian J. 2019, 14, 715.
[31] Z. Wang, J. Nie, W. Qin, Q. Hu, B. Z. Tang, Nat. Commun. 2016, 7 , 12033.
[32] T. Förster, K. Kasper, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. 1955, 59, 976.
[33] J. Mei, N. L. Leung, R. T. Kwok, J. W. Lam, B. Z. Tang, Chem. Rev. 
2015, 115, 11718.
[34] R.  Hu, E.  Lager, A.  Aguilar-Aguilar, J.  Liu, J. W.  Lam, H. H.  Sung,  
I. D. Williams, Y . Zhong, K. S. Wong, E. Pena-Cabrera, J. Phys. Chem. 
C 2009, 113, 15845.
[35] M. Heskins, J. E. Guillet, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A 1968, 2, 1441.
[36] S. Nayak, S. B. Debord, L. A. Lyon, Langmuir 2003, 19, 7374.
[37] M. Born, E. Wolf, Principles of Optics: Electromagnetic Theory of Prop-
agation, Interference, and Diffraction of Light, Elsevier, Amsterdam 
2013.
[38] M. Shibayama, Macromol. Chem. Phys. 1998, 199, 1.
[39] O. Borisov, E. Zhulina, Macromolecules 2005, 38, 2506.
[40] M. Mooney, J. Appl. Phys. 1940, 11, 582.
[41] G. R. Hamed, Rubber Chem. Technol. 1994, 67, 529.
[42] K. Kendall, Proc. R. Soc. A 1975, 344, 287.
[43] C. Wu, S. Zhou, Macromolecules 1995, 28, 8381.
[44] E. C. Cho, J. Lee, K. Cho, Macromolecules 2003, 36, 9929.
[45] A. Halperin, M. Kröger, F. M. Winnik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2015, 
54, 15342.
[46] E. J. N. Dolgin, Nature 2018, 555, 300.