EMP: Max-P Regionalization with Enriched
Constraints
Y unfan Kanga, b
aDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering
bCenter for Geospatial Sciences
University of California, Riverside
ykang040@ucr.edu
Amr Magdy a, b
aDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering
bCenter for Geospatial Sciences
University of California, Riverside
amr@cs.ucr.edu
Abstract—Spatial regionalization is the process of grouping a
set of spatial areas into spatially contiguous and homogeneous
regions. This paper introduces an enriched max-p-regions (EMP)
problem; a regionalization process that allows enriched user-
deﬁned constraints based on SQL aggregate functions. In addi-
tion to enabling richer constraints, it enables users to employ
multiple constraints simultaneously to signiﬁcantly push the
expressiveness and effectiveness of the existing regionalization
literature. The EMP problem is NP-hard and signiﬁcantly
enriches the existing regionalization problems. Such a major
enrichment introduces several challenges in both feasibility and
scalability. To address these challenges, we propose the Fa CT
algorithm, a three-phase greedy approach that ﬁnds a feasible set
of spatial regions that satisfy EMP constraints while supporting
large datasets compared to the existing literature. Our extensive
experimental evaluation has demonstrated the effectiveness and
scalability of our techniques on several real datasets.
Index Terms—spatial, regionalization, max-p, aggregate
I. I NTRODUCTION
Regionalization is the process of clustering a set of areas
into spatially contiguous and homogeneous regions. Unlike
traditional clustering of multi-dimensional points, the basic
units in regionalization are spatial polygons that are grouped
based on both attribute values and adjacency in space. Re-
gionalization is widely used in numerous applications such as
epidemic analysis [7], service delivery systems [3], water qual-
ity assessment [13], weather temperature classiﬁcation [18],
rainfall erosivity estimation [46], health data analysis [8], spa-
tial crowdsourcing [12], [48], and constituency allocation [44].
Identifying regions is a computational and conceptual chal-
lenge. One of the fundamental challenges is determining the
spatial scale of the studied phenomena. For example, snowing
is spatially correlated at the level of multiple states, e.g., the
USA midwest states, while temperature is spatially correlated
at a county level. Most regionalization routines require the
number of regions, p, as an input parameter, e.g., in the USA,
p =5 0 is a state level and p = 3000 is a county level. This puts
the burden of determining the spatial scale on the data analysts,
forcing them to analyze multiple p values, which increases the
computational cost and limits the query expressiveness.
The latest regionalization formulation, called the max-p-
regions problem (or MP-regions), has addressed the scale
problem [15] and become popular in different applications,
including urban spatial structures [4], measuring intra-urban
poverty [17], population growth analysis [21], crime anal-
ysis [41], regional inequality analysis [43], spatial uncer-
tainty [49], and neighborhood delineation [50]. With the obser-
vation that researchers usually know a condition that a region
must satisfy to be suitable for the analysis, the MP-regions
automatically discovers the maximum number of regions that
satisfy a given user-deﬁned constraint instead of forcing users
to input p. However, the MP-regions problem has several
limitations in both scalability and expressiveness. Currently,
the state-of-the-art algorithms take 3-60 mins to process a
dataset with ∼ 3k areas, depending on the threshold value. As
a result, existing real applications, listed above, use relatively
small data, ranging from tens of areas [11], [21], [43] to only
a few hundred [4], [17], [41], [49], [50]. It is explicitly stated
in [49] that to use the MP-regions algorithms “ one must be
willing to reduce the number of geographic units of analy-
sis.” Such severe scalability limitations prevent the existing
MP-regions formulation from supporting a wide variety of
user-deﬁned constraints that enable users to express ﬂexible
regionalization queries for various applications.
Existing MP-regions formulation allows a single user-
deﬁned threshold lower bound on one attribute , e.g., total
region population ≥ 100K. However, many analysis tasks can-
not be catered with a single constraint that involves a simple
threshold. In many real applications, it is common to have
multiple constraints with different aggregate functions. For
example, studies show that the COVID-19 virus transmission
pattern is closely related to prosperity and labor mobility [7].
In order to make region-speciﬁc recommendations for pre-
venting the virus spread, policymakers can issue a query to
identify reasonably populated regions with a total population
≥ 200000, an average monthly income between $3000 to
$5000, and public transportation passengers ≥ 10000. Another
example is studying the changes in population requires con-
sidering multiple factors that inﬂuence the phenomenon [21]
with different aggregation functions such as the minimum
population of each area, the maximum school drop-out rate,
the average age of the population, and total unemployment.
A third example is the patrol sector partition problem [11]
that aims to consider the number of calls and the workload
balance. These example applications signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from
1914
2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE)
2375-026X/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICDE53745.2022.00189
2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) | 978-1-6654-0883-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICDE53745.2022.00189
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
enriching the expressiveness of MP-regions queries that will
enable exploring different scenarios and expanding analysis
capabilities. Currently, such advanced regionalization queries
cannot be expressed using the existing MP-regions formulation
due to its limited support for user-deﬁned constraints, limiting
its full potential in many real applications.
This paper introduces an enriched MP-regions problem
(EMP) that addresses the existing MP-regions limitations.
EMP enables users to analyze one to two orders of magnitude
larger datasets than the currently supported ones. Further-
more, EMP enriches user-deﬁned constraints with three novel
features: (1) EMP provides an enriched set of aggregates
that contains three families of aggregate functions, namely,
extrema aggregates , centrality aggregates , and counting ag-
gregates. The three families of aggregates are inspired by
the standard SQL aggregate functions from which we adopt
minimum and maximum as extrema aggregates, average as
a centrality aggregate, and summation and count as counting
aggregates. (2) EMP allows using a range comparison operator
that expresses all possible comparisons, less-than-or-equal ( ≤ ),
larger-than-or-equal ( ≥ ), and range comparison. This enables
users to set both lower and upper bounds for their constraints
instead of only lower bounds in existing formulations. (3) EMP
supports multiple constraints instead of a single constraint.
The EMP formulation addresses the limitation of the existing
MP-regions formulation and reveals the full potential for
regionalization queries in different applications.
The EMP problem is an NP-hard problem (see Section IV),
so ﬁnding an optimal solution is intractable. We formulated the
EMP as a mathematical optimization problem using mixed-
integer programming (MIP) problem [28] and solved it with
the world’s fastest MIP solver Gurobi [25]. The optimizer
takes 33.86s to ﬁnd an optimal solution for 9 areas, 10 hours
for 16 areas, and is not able to return a feasible solution for
25 areas after 110 hours of execution [29]. This clearly shows
the infeasibility of ﬁnding an exact solution for hundreds or
thousands of areas in a reasonable runtime. However, even
ﬁnding an approximate solution faces two main challenges.
First, the newly introduced constraints are non-monotonic.
Therefore, adding or removing areas to and from a certain
region does not provide any guarantee of satisfying or violating
these constraints. This requires exhaustive exploration for the
whole search space to ﬁnd the solution, which is intractable
with such an NP-hard problem. Second, while satisfying mul-
tiple non-monotonic constraints, a region can easily become
overlarge. Having oversized regions reduces the number of
regions p, which contradicts the objective of maximizing p.
To address these challenges, we introduce Fa CT , a three-
phase algorithm to solve the EMP problem. The ﬁrst phase
derives theoretical bounds to verify the feasibility of ﬁnding a
solution given the user-deﬁned constraints. In addition, in the
case of infeasibility, it enables the user to potentially alter input
data to satisfy the constraints. This provides great ﬂexibility
to tune either data or query parameters adaptively and enables
rich exploratory analysis capabilities for a wide variety of
datasets. The second phase constructs a feasible solution that
satisﬁes the input constraints while maximizing the number of
regions p. The phase is divided into three independent steps
with the following features: (a) Each step is carefully designed
to exploit the mathematical properties of one type of constraint
to maximize the p to its theoretical upper bound. (b) The input
and output of each step are designed exquisitely to reduce the
search space for the following steps and mitigate the conﬂicts
introduced by the different mathematical properties of different
constraints. (c) The steps are independent of each other,
enabling Fa CT to construct feasible solutions progressively
and handle any arbitrary combinations of constraint types
effectively and efﬁciently. (d) The algorithm provides multiple
parameter tuning options so that the users can choose the best
aggregate strategy according to the use case and the char-
acteristic of the dataset. (e) The algorithm supports datasets
with multiple connected components, while the MP-regions
formulation supports only a single connected component. The
third phase of Fa CT performs a local search adapting the
Tabu search [23] and swaps areas between regions to improve
the overall heterogeneity of the regions.
Our experimental evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness
of Fa CT on real datasets. We evaluate the impact of dif-
ferent threshold ranges, different combinations of constraints,
and the scalability to process datasets. Our contributions are
summarized as follows:
• We deﬁne an enriched max-p regions problem (EMP) that
reveals the full potential of max-p regionalization.
• We prove the NP-hardness of the EMP problem.
• We propose Fa CT ; a three-phase greedy algorithm that
provides approximate solutions for the EMP problem.
• We perform an extensive experimental evaluation that
shows the effectiveness of our techniques on real datasets.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the related work. Section III deﬁnes the problem and
Section IV proves its NP-hardness. Our proposed solution is
detailed in Section V, and its time and space complexity are
analyzed in Section VI. Section VII shows the experimental
evaluations and Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. R ELA TED WORK
The regionalization problem originates from the demand
for aggregating homogeneous regions in the analytical tasks
performed by social scientists and statisticians [19]. Region-
alization is referred to by different names, including region
building [10], conditional clustering [33], clustering with rela-
tional constraints [19], contiguity-constrained clustering [36],
constrained classiﬁcation [24], maximum split clustering under
connectivity constraints [26], and p-regions problem [16]
that is used in a variety of applications such as detecting
functional regions [30], [31], network-constrained urban man-
agement [54], and partitioning compact regions [32], [34],
[35]. The max-p-regions problem (MP-regions) [15] has been
introduced to eliminate the requirement for inputting the
number of regions in advance. It aggregates areas into a
maximum number of regions so that each region satisﬁes a
single user-deﬁned constraint with a summation aggregate,
1915
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
e.g., total population ≥ 20K. Existing variants [20], [21],
[47] use the road network-based connectivity as an additional
spatial constraint to aggregate regions or use multiple attributes
to impose the constraint. However, all existing variants still
support only a single constraint of one type as the MP-regions
problem.
Existing regionalization techniques that perform multi-
criteria districting [11], [14], [21], [51], [53] use multi-
objective optimization to partition the space based on multiple
attributes. These techniques still put the burden of determining
the spatial scale, i.e., the number of output regions, on the user.
They also allow the user to deﬁne a single constraint on one
of the attributes, limiting the query expressiveness. Our EMP
problem addresses these limitations. It enables users to deﬁne
multiple constraints on different attributes to provide ﬂexible
and expressive queries. In addition, it inherits the automatic
discovery of the appropriate number of regions from the MP-
regions and eliminates the spatial scale problem.
We classify the popular approaches to tackle the NP-
hard rationalization problems into two main categories. The
ﬁrst category is the clustering methods [38], [40] with two
phases. The ﬁrst phase clusters the centroids of polygons
using a traditional clustering algorithm. The second phase
then imposes the spatial connectivity constraint to ensure
that each region is geographically connected. The second
category adopts a two-phase contiguity-constrained heuristic
optimization approach [5], [15], [22], [39], [47]. The set of
spatial areas is usually represented by a graph that encodes
the spatial contiguity relationships. With the spatial contiguity
constraint imposed explicitly, a feasible initial solution is
constructed in the ﬁrst phase and then optimized using heuris-
tic or mixed-heuristic search methods in the second phase.
The construction methods include tree partition [5], [6] and
greedy aggregation [15], [20], [22], [39]. The heuristic search
phase optimizes the objective function to improve the region
homogeneity [5], [6], [22] or geographical compactness [22]
without violating the contiguity constraint.
Our work follows the second category of contiguity-
constrained heuristic optimization search. We consider mul-
tiple constraints with different aggregate functions that do not
exist in the literature, so none of the existing methods can
obtain a feasible solution that satisﬁes our enriched constraints.
III. P ROBLEM DEFINITION
This section formally deﬁnes the enriched max-p regions
(EMP) problem. Let A = {a
1,a 2, ..., an} denote the set of
areas. Each area ai is deﬁned by four attributes: ai=(i,bi,Si,di),
where i is the area identiﬁer, bi is an arbitrary spatial polygon
that deﬁnes the area’s spatial boundaries, Si is a set of spatially
extensive attributes and di is a dissimilarity attribute. The
dissimilarity attribute di is used in computing output regions’
heterogeneity. The rest of the section presents basic deﬁnitions,
then deﬁnes the EMP problem formally.
Deﬁnition III.1 (User-deﬁned Constraint) . A user-deﬁned
constraint c is a condition that is deﬁned as “ l ≤ f (s) ≤ u”o r
“ f (s) ∈ [l, u]”. c is identiﬁed with a 4-tuple: ( f ,s,l,u), where
f is an aggregate function, s is a spatially extensive attribute,
l ∈ [−∞ , ∞ ) is a number that represents a lower bound, and
u ∈ (−∞ , ∞ ] is a number that represents an upper bound.
EMP allows f to be MIN, MAX, A VG, SUM, or COUNT
that compute minimum, maximum, average, summation, and
count aggregates, respectively, with the same semantic as the
SQL standards. The attribute s is a spatially extensive attribute
whose value is divided over the smaller areas when the area
is fragmented. For example, the population value of a state is
divided over its cities, so the population is a spatially extensive
attribute. This is the opposite to spatially intensive attributes,
such as temperature, that are not divided when the spatial area
is fragmented. Examples of s include the population, labor
force, and households in each area. When l = −∞ , the range
has an open-ended lower bound and the constraint becomes
f (s) ≤ u. Similarly, when u = ∞ , it becomes f (s) ≥ l.
Deﬁnition III.2 (Region). A region R is a set of g areas:
R = {a
1,a 2, ..., ag}, such that: (1) g ≥ 1, i.e., R contains at
least one area. (2) Areas in R are spatially contiguous, i.e., ∀
ai,a j ∈ R, ∃ a sequence of areas ( ak,...,al) s.t. both ( ai, ak)
and ( al, aj) are spatial neighbors, and every two consecutive
areas in the sequence are spatial neighbors.
Deﬁnition III.3 (Heterogeneity). Heterogeneity H(P ) of a set
of regions P is deﬁned as:
H(P )=
∑
∀ R∈ P
∑
∀ ai,aj ∈ R
|di − dj| (1)
This deﬁnition of H is popular in the MP-regions liter-
ature, so it is recognized by social sciences experts as a
primary measure for region heterogeneity. However, our work
can support alternative deﬁnitions, such as improving spatial
compactness or balancing multiple criteria. The reason is that
our second phase, which is based on Tabu search as discussed
in Section V, can deal with different optimization functions.
EMP Problem . The EMP problem is deﬁned as follows:
Input: Given: (1) A set of n areas: A = {a
1,a 2, ..., an}.
(2) A set of user-deﬁned constraints C = {c1,c 2, ..., cm}.
Output: (1) A set of regions P = {R1,R 2, ..., Rp}, where
1 ≤ p ≤ n and each region Ri satisﬁes the below EMP
constraints and objectives. (2) A set U0 = A−⋃p
i=1
Ri, i.e., U0
contains all areas that are not assigned to any feasible region
R
i, ∀1 ≤ i ≤ p. Areas in U0 may not be spatially contiguous.
EMP Constraints:
• Ri ∩ Rj = ∅, ∀Ri,R j ∈ P ∧ i ̸= j
• Ri satisﬁes all constraints cj ∈ C,
. ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ p, 1 ≤ j ≤ m
Objectives:
• Maximizing the number of regions p.
• Minimizing regions’ overall heterogeneity H(P ).
EMP has two objectives. In case they contradict during
building the output regions, the ﬁrst objective (maximizing
1916
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
the number of regions) is favored over the second one (min-
imizing regions’ heterogeneity). This allows users to obtain
the maximum number of desirable regions without provid-
ing the number of regions as an input, as favored by the
domain experts [15], which addresses a major limitation in
the previous regionalization problems. The second objective
uses a dissimilarity attribute that is not necessarily a spatial
attribute. For example, social scientists produce regions that
are homogeneous in average income level.
Comparing the EMP problem with the original MP-regions
problem [15], there are two major differences that are in-
troduced by the enriched user-deﬁned constraints. First, the
enriched constraints are not always monotonic. Assuming that
all spatially extensive attribute values are positive, adding an
area to a region or removing an area from a region in MP-
regions guarantees a monotone change towards satisfying the
constraint threshold. This is not the case for the EMP problem
due to allowing A VG, MIN, and MAX constraints. In addition,
the EMP problem allows upper-bounded threshold ranges,
so adding areas to a region without additional validation
leads to violating the SUM and COUNT constraints’ upper
bounds. Second, the EMP problem allows unassigned areas,
U
0, to exist in the ﬁnal area partition, contrary to the MP-
regions problem. This provides ﬂexibility to satisfy multi-
ple constraints of different types, especially MIN and MAX
constraints that commonly cause invalid areas, as discussed
in the following sections. Allowing unassigned areas enables
constraints such as MIN and MAX to serve as ﬁlters to
ﬁlter out areas with undesired properties, which introduces
more tolerance and enables richer exploration capabilities to
regionalization queries.
IV . NP- HARDNESS OF EMP
This section proves the NP-hardness of the EMP problem.
The NP-hardness of the EMP problem follows the results that
the MP-regions problem is NP-hard [1], [2], [15]. The MP-
regions problem takes as input: (1) a set of spatially contiguous
areas A = {a
1,a 2, ..., an}. Each area ai is associated with an
identiﬁer i, a spatial polygon bi, a spatially extensive attribute
si and a dissimilarity attribute di, (2) a threshold value t.F o r
the purpose of the proof, we solve both the MP-regions and
the EMP problem as decision problems with a ﬁxed p = k.
Theorem 1. The EMP problem is NP-hard.
Proof. Let X = ( A, t) be an instance of the MP-regions
problem. We construct an instance Y = ( A
′,C ) of the EMP
problem as follows: (1) For each area ai ∈ X.A, add
to Y.A′ an area a′
i
= {i, bi,S ′
i,d i}, S′
i = {si}. (2) Let
C = {(SUM, S ′[0],t , ∞ )}. (3) Let the number of regions p
equal k. This reduction is of polynomial time of O(n) where
n is the number of areas in A. Therefore, an algorithm that
decides on the instance Y of the EMP problem decides on
the instance X of the MP-regions problem as well. As the
MP-regions problem is NP-hard, then the EMP problem is
NP-hard, and the proof is complete.
V. P ROPOSED SOLUTION
This section presents Fa CT , a three-phase algorithm that
ﬁnds a feasible solution for an instance of the EMP problem
with low overall heterogeneity. The ﬁrst phase is a feasibility
phase that veriﬁes the existence of any feasible solution
given the user-deﬁned constraints. The second phase is a
construction phase that constructs a feasible initial solution
with the maximum number of regions p while satisfying
all user-deﬁned constraints. This phase represents the major
contribution of this algorithm. It balances two challenging
objectives: satisfying multiple non-monotonic user-deﬁned
constraints and producing a maximum number of spatially
contiguous regions. The third phase is a local search phase
that improves the initial solution of the construction phase in
terms of the heterogeneity score. The following sections detail
each phase.
A. Feasibility Phase
The EMP problem deals with arbitrary combinations of con-
straints on different attributes. The goal of the feasibility phase
is to signal the user at an early stage for: (1) the infeasibility
of ﬁnding a solution for the given set of constraints on the
given dataset, and (2) the possibility of removing some areas
to satisfy the given constraints.
The fact that our algorithm can detect and ﬁlter out invalid
areas for all constraints, including non-monotonic constraints,
gives it major practical advantages when employing multiple
constraints. The algorithm is not only able to give users a
heads-up on the infeasibility of their constraints, but also users
can choose to remove input areas that cause such infeasibility
automatically. This gives data analysts great ﬂexibility to
analyze a wide variety of datasets and constraints.
Given a set of user-deﬁned constraints C =
{(MIN,s
min,l min,u min), (MA X,s max,l max,u max),
(AV G, savg ,l avg ,u avg ), (SUM, s sum,l sum,u sum),
(COUNT,s count,l count,u count)}, we check the feasibility
of applying each type of constraint as follows:
(1) For A VG constraints , we compute the average value
AV G (savg ) of attribute savg over all areas. If AV G(savg ) <
lavg or AV G(savg ) >u avg , we infer that there exists no
partition where all regions satisfy the A VG constraint without
removing any area. This is justiﬁed by Theorem 3 below.
Theorem 2. If ∃P = {R
1,R 2, ..., Rp} so that every region
Ri ∈ P satisﬁes c =( AV G, savg ,l avg ,u avg ) and P contains
all areas in a set A, then the average value AV G(savg ) of savg
over all areas of A satisﬁes c, i.e., lavg ≤ AV G(savg ) ≤ uavg .
Proof. If p =1 , i.e., P = {A}, the proposition is trivially
true. If p> 1, as all regions in P satisfy c,w eh a v e :
lavg ≤ Ri.AV G(savg ) ≤ uavg , ∀i, 1 ≤ i ≤ p (2)
where Ri.AV G(savg ) represents the average value of attribute
savg over areas in region Ri. Let |Ri| denote the number of
areas in region Ri.A s P contains all areas, we have:
p∑
i=1
|Ri|= n (3)
1917
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
Also, by deﬁnition:
AV G(savg ) × n =
p∑
i=1
(|Ri|×Ri.AV G) (4)
AV G(savg )=
∑p
i=1
(|Ri|×Ri.AV G)
n
≤
∑p
i=1
|Ri|uavg
n = uavg
(5)
AV G(savg )=
∑p
i=1
(|Ri|×Ri.AV G)
n
≥
∑p
i=1
|Ri|lavg
n = lavg
(6)
Equations 5 and 6 =⇒ lavg ≤ AV G(savg ) ≤ uavg .
Hence, the Theorem 2 is true, and the proof is complete.
Theorem 3. F o ra na r e as e tA and an A VG constraint c =
(AV G, savg ,l avg ,u avg ), if the average value of savg over A,
AV G(savg ), does not satisfy c, i.e., AV G(savg ) <l avg or
AV G(savg ) >u avg , then ∄P = {R1,R 2, ..., Rp} such that P
partitions all areas in A and Ri ∈ P satisﬁes c, ∀1 ≤ i ≤ p.
Theorem 3 is proved by proving its contrapositive Theorem 2.
(2) For MIN constraints , we compute the minimum
and maximum values over all areas for attribute smin,
MIN (smin) and MA X(smin), respectively. Two different
cases could cause infeasibility: (a) If MA X(smin) <l min
or MIN (smin) >u min, then there is no area that satisﬁes
the MIN constraint and no valid regions can be constructed,
so there is no feasible solution. (b) If MIN (s
min) <l min <
MA X(smin), all areas with smin <l min are invalid areas that
cannot be part of any valid region, so they must be ﬁltered out
to build a feasible solution. Therefore, there is room to ﬁnd a
feasible solution after removing invalid areas.
(3) Similarly for MAX constraints , there are two cases of
infeasibility: (a) If MIN (s
max) >u max or MA X(smax) <
lmax, there is no area that satisﬁes the MAX constraint, and
there is no feasible solution. (b) Areas with smax >u max are
invalid areas that must be ﬁltered out to ﬁnd a solution.
(4) For SUM constraints , we compute the minimum
and summation of all areas for ssum, MIN (ssum) and
SUM (ssum), respectively. There are three cases of infeasi-
bility: (a) If MIN (ssum) >u sum, no region can have ssum
within the range. (b) If SUM (ssum) <l sum, even the trivial
region containing all areas cannot have ssum within the range.
(c) Areas with ssum >u sum are invalid and must be removed.
(5) For COUNT constraints , if the number of areas n<
lcount, there is no feasible solution as a region containing all
areas cannot meet the lower bound lcount.
The feasibility phase iterates through the area set and
computes the needed attribute aggregates for all constraints
in a single pass. This pass is enough to ﬁlter out invalid areas,
that have s
min <l min, smax >u max,o r ssum >u sum,
to eliminate potential invalid regions. However, the feasibility
pass is not enough to ﬁlter out invalid areas for the A VG
constraint. This is performed during the following construction
phase while imposing A VG constraints. All invalid areas are
ﬁltered out from A, added to the set U
0, and they are not
considered in any further processing. The remaining areas in
set A are passed to the following phases.
B. Construction Phase
The construction phase greedily constructs a feasible solu-
tion that: (a) satisﬁes all user-deﬁned constraints, (b) maxi-
mizes the number of regions p, and (c) minimizes the num-
ber of unassigned areas. This phase faces the challenges of
simultaneously satisfying multiple non-monotonic constraints
while preventing building oversized regions that contradict
maximizing p. To address these challenges, the construction
phase satisﬁes each family of user-deﬁned constraints in a
separate step, and each step handles different constraints in
isolation. By this, we gain several beneﬁts towards address-
ing the challenges. First, each step focuses on one type of
optimization, making it an easier problem to solve. Second,
dividing the logic into consecutive steps provides ﬂexibility to
handle queries with any arbitrary subset of different constraints
(as discussed in Section V -D). Third, the order of steps makes
use of the mathematical properties of different aggregate
functions to increase the probability of producing a feasible
solution. MIN, MAX, and SUM constraints are used as ﬁlters
to oust invalid areas and provide seed areas for the following
steps. Then, A VG constraint, which is the most challenging
to satisfy, takes the seed areas and grows as many regions as
possible. The last step performs only necessary modiﬁcations
to satisfy any violated SUM and COUNT constraints, which
are easier to satisfy due to the monotonicity of SUM and
COUNT aggregate functions. Fourth, separated steps facilitate
maximizing the value of p, as detailed later, without violating
the constraints that have been satisﬁed previously. Conse-
quently, our construction phase produces an initial partitioning
for the space with a near-optimal p value that is fed to the fol-
lowing phase to minimize the regions’ heterogeneity. Although
reducing the overall heterogeneity score is an objective for the
ﬁnal solution, this phase is not primarily designed to minimize
heterogeneity, which is optimized in the following phase.
The construction phase executes multiple iterations. Each
iteration produces a feasible partition, and we maintain the
partition with the highest p value. Each iteration is divided into
three steps. The ﬁrst step satisﬁes extrema constraints (MIN
and MAX constraints), the second step satisﬁes centrality con-
straints (A VG constraints), and the third step satisﬁes counting
constraints (SUM and COUNT constraints). We detail each
step below. The area set in Figure 1a is used as a running
example to illustrate different steps of the construction. For
simplicity and without loss of generality, we assume that all
constraints are imposed on the same attribute s.
Step 1: Filtering and Seeding . The ﬁrst step satisﬁes
extrema constraints, i.e., MIN and MAX constraints. These
two constraints have two functionalities: (a) ﬁltering out the
invalid areas, and (b) specifying the set of seed areas .
Invalid areas are excluded during the feasibility phase (Sec-
tion V -A). We select seed areas as the areas that meet lower
1918
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
a2
s2=2
d2=12
a1
s1=1
d2=11
a5
s5=5
d5=15
a6
s6=6
d6=16
a3
s3=3
d3=13
a7
s7=7
d7=17
a8
s8=8
d8=18
a9
s9=9
d9=19
a4
s4=4
d4=14
(a) Example area set
Min Seed
Max Seeda2
s2=2
d2=12
a5
s5=5
d5=15
a6
s6=6
d6=16
a4
s4=4
d4=14
a3
s3=3
d3=13
a7
s7=7
d7=17
(b) Area ﬁltration and seed area
selection
Fig. 1: Step 1: Filtering and Seeding
and upper bound values of one of MIN or MAX constraints.
For instance, for two constraints c
1 =( MIN,s 1,l 1,u 1) and
c2 =( MA X,s 2,l 2,u 2), any area with l1 ≤ s1 ≤ u1 or
l2 ≤ s2 ≤ u2 is a valid seed area. This rule is generalizable
to any number of MIN and MAX constraints.
This step provides three levels of optimizations through
choosing a seed area that satisﬁes the bounds of only one con-
straint. First, it ﬁnds seed areas for any arbitrary combination
of MIN/MAX constraints. For constraints that are imposed on
different attributes or have disjoint upper and lower bounds,
there is no single area that satisﬁes all of them. So, considering
each constraint in isolation from others provides ﬂexibility to
ﬁnd seeds for any query. Second, the number of seed areas is
an upper bound for the number of regions p as each feasible
region must contain at least one seed area for each constraint.
So, using a maximum number of seed areas and growing
the regions based on them contributes to the objective of
maximizing p. Third, it enables piggybacking the seed areas
selection on the invalid areas ﬁltration during the feasibility
phase. While checking the validity of an area, the algorithm
checks the seeding conditions and mark seed areas.
Example: Figure 1b illustrates the result of Step 1 for the
example area set in Figure 1a. The extrema constraints are
set as {(MIN,s , 2, 4), (MA X,s ,6, 7)}. Areas a
1, a8, and a9
are moved to set U0 because their attribute values are below
2 or above 7. The remaining areas after ﬁltering are shown in
Figure 1b. Area a
2, a3, and a4 are selected as seed areas for
the MIN constraint and area a6 and a7 are selected as seed
areas for the MAX constraint, as shown in Figure 1b.
Complexity analysis. All operations of the feasibility phase
and Step 1 of the construction phase are performed in one pass
over the n areas. Each area is validated against all MIN, MAX,
and SUM constraints to be classiﬁed as either invalid, valid,
or seed area. The time complexity is O(m × n), where m is
the number of constraints and typically m< <n .
Remark 1. The time complexity of the feasibility phase and
the Filtering and Seeding is O(m × n).
Step 2: Region Growing . The second step grows regions
that satisfy the A VG constraint c =( AV G, s, l, u), without
violating the MIN/MAX constraints. This step is divided into
three substeps. The ﬁrst substep initializes a set of regions. The
second substep assigns the unassigned areas to the regions. The
third substep combines regions to ensure each region satisﬁes
all constraints. We detail each substep below.
Substep 2.1 utilizes the set of seed areas, called seeds,
from Step 1 to initialize a set of initial regions. Areas in
seeds already satisfy at least one of the MIN/MAX con-
straints, so they must be included in any valid region. The
algorithm iterates over seeds and classiﬁes all seed areas
into three subsets based on their A VG attribute value s:
unassigned
avg, unassigned low, and unassigned high.
unassigned avg contains areas that satisfy the condition
l ≤ s ≤ u. unassigned low contains seed areas that satisfy
s<l , i.e., s value is lower than c’s lower bound. Similarly,
unassigned high contains seed areas with s>u . Only areas
in unassigned avg satisfy c and are used in region initializa-
tion directly. As we want to maximize the number of output
regions p, we make each area in unassigned
avg a separate
region, and all new regions are added to a region list P . Then,
we merge areas in unassigned low and unassigned high
with their spatial neighbors to compose regions that satisfy c.
Algorithm 1 gives the merging procedure.
Algorithm 1 initiates each unassigned area as a temporary
region R (Lines 4 to 6). While R does not satisfy the constraint
c’s bounds, the algorithm tries to add a neighbor area an that
moves R’s overall average of attribute s towards c’s range
(Lines 16 to 21). Once R satisﬁes c, it is added to the region
list P (Lines 10 to 12). If R’s neighbors are exhausted and
cannot form a valid region, the whole procedure is reverted,
and areas of R remain unassigned.
Substep 2.2 tries to assign all remaining unassigned areas,
either seed areas or regular areas. Similar to classifying seeds
areas in Substep 2.1, all areas that are not in seeds set are
added to either unassigned
avg set, unassigned low set,
or unassigned high set, depending on their s value. There
are two rounds for assigning the remaining unassigned areas.
In the ﬁrst round, we try to add the unassigned areas to their
neighbor regions. All areas in unassigned
avg can be safely
added to any of its neighbor regions as it is guaranteed not to
introduce a violation of c. For each area in unassigned
low
and unassigned high, we must check if adding it to the
neighbor region violates c. The second round tries to assign the
areas in unassigned high and unassigned low by merging
the regions. Given an unassigned area a, the algorithm tries
to merge one of a’s neighbor regions R and R’s neighbor
region with a and checks if c is satisﬁed for the newly merged
region. The merging process terminates when all a’s neighbors
cannot absorb it or a merge limit, i.e., the number of allowed
merge trials, is reached. The merge limit is set to prevent the
formation of oversized regions and control the runtime.
Substep 2.3 combines neighbor regions to ensure that all
regions satisfy all MIN and MAX constraints. Because areas
that form seeds are selected by a single MIN or MAX
constraint, regions that are aggregated based on a single seed
area are guaranteed to satisfy only one of those constraints.
To ensure each region satisﬁes all constraints, the algorithm
iterates over the region list P and merges the region that does
not satisfy every constraint with one of its neighbor regions
1919
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
Algorithm 1: Region Growing - Merging Areas
Input: c =( AV G, s, l, u), unassigned low,
unassigned high, P
Output: unassigned low, unassigned high, P
1 removed areas ←∅
2 u areas ← unassigned low ∪ unassigned high
3 foreach area a ∈ u areas do
4 Create a tempory region R with R.id = -1;
5 R.addArea(a);
6 updated = true;
7 neighbor areas = R.getNeighbors();
8 while updated do
9 updated = false;
10 if l ≤ R.getAverage() ≤ u then
11 R.updateId(P .size() + 1);
12 P .add(R);
13 removed areas.addAll(R.areas);
14 end
15 else
16 foreach area an in neighbor areas do
17 if an is not assigned to any region then
18 if (R.getAverage() <l AND an.s >u )
OR (( R.getAverage() >u AND an.s <
l)) then
19 R.addArea(an);
20 updated = true;
21 break;
22 end
23 end
24 end
25 end
26 end
27 end
28 unassigned low.removeAll(removed areas);
29 unassigned high.removeAll(removed areas);
30 return unassigned low, unassigned high, P ;
a2
s2=2
d2=12
a5
s5=5
d5=15
a6
s6=6
d6=16
a4
s4=4
d4=14
a3
s3=3
d3=13
a7
s7=7
d7=17
(a) Substep 2.1: Region Initial-
ization
a2
s2=2
d2=12
a5
s5=5
d5=15
a6
s6=6
d6=16
a4
s4=4
d4=14
a3
s3=3
d3=13
a7
s7=7
d7=17
(b) Substep 2.2: Area Assign-
ment
Fig. 2: Step 2: Region Growing - Substep 2.1 & 2.2-Round 1
that satisfy other constraints. The iteration stops when all
regions in the P satisfy MIN and MAX constraints, i.e., each
region contains at least one seed area for each MIN/MAX
constraint. This substep does not affect satisfying the A VG
constraint c because merging two regions that already satisfy
c produces a region that still satisﬁes it. Thus, after Step 2
concludes, all regions in the region list P satisfy all the MIN,
MAX, and A VG constraints.
Example: Figure 2 shows an example of Substep 2.1 and
Substep 2.2. Given c =( AV G, s, 4, 5), in Substep 2.1,
only seed area a
4 is added to unassigned avg and ini-
tialized as a new region Rred (Figure 2a). a2 and a3 are
a2
s2=2
d2=12
a3
s3=3
d3=13
a6
s6=6
d6=16
a5
s5=5
d5=15
a4
s4=4
d4=14
(a) Unassigned area a2.
a2
s2=2
d2=12
a3
s3=3
d3=13
a6
s6=6
d6=16
a5
s5=5
d5=15
a4
s4=4
d4=14
(b) Region merging and
Assigning a2.
Fig. 3: Step 2: Region Growing - Substep 2.2 - Round 2
a2
s2=2
d2=12
a5
s5=5
d5=15
a6
s6=6
d6=16
a4
s4=4
d4=14
a3
s3=3
d3=13
a7
s7=7
d7=17
(a) Case 1
a2
s2=2
d2=12
a5
s5=5
d5=15
a6
s6=6
d6=16
a4
s4=4
d4=14
a3
s3=3
d3=13
a7
s7=7
d7=17
(b) Case 2
Fig. 4: Step 2: Region Growing - Substep 2.3
added to unassigned low and a6 and a7 are added to
unassigned high. The average of a2.s2 and a6.s6 is 4, and
they are combined to form the region Rblue. Similarly, a3
and a7 form the region Rgreen with average value 5. So,
Substep 2.2 initializes three regions as depicted in Figure 2a.
Then, in Substep 2.2, the remaining unassigned area a
5 is
assigned to its neighbor region Rblue as depicted in Figure 2b.
Example: Figure 3 provides an example for Round 2 of
Substep 2.2. In contrast to the example in Figure 2, the
unassigned area a
2 cannot be added to its neighbor region
Rblue = {a3,a 6} directly. Adding a2 to Rblue generates a re-
gion with an average s value equals 3.67, which is smaller than
4 and violates the constraint c =( AV G, s, 4, 5). Instead, the
algorithm forms a temporary region Rred = {a3,a 4,a 5,a 6}
by merging Rblue and its neighbor region Rgreen = {a4,a 5},
as shown in Figure 3b. Rred accepts a2 and the average value
is 4.4, which satisﬁes the constraint c.
Example: Figure 4 gives an example of Substep 2.3 for
the example region partition in Figure 2b. Rred = {a4}
contains only the MIN seed area; hence it does not sat-
isfy the MAX constraint. Because both neighbor regions
R
blue = {a2,a 5,a 6} and Rgreen = {a3,a 7} satisfy the MAX
constraint, Rred can be combined with either region to form
a region satisfying all constraints. The results are depicted in
Figure 4a and Figure 4b, respectively.
Complexity analysis. The Substep 2.1 and the ﬁrst round
of the Substep 2.2 iterate through all seed areas and each
takes O(n) time. The second round of the Substep 2.2 iterates
through the unassigned area set for multiple iterations. In each
iteration, at least one area is removed from the unassigned
area set or otherwise no update is made and the loop breaks.
The number of unassigned areas is ≤ n, hence the worst-
case total number of operations is ∑
n
i=1
i = O(n2). The
merge operations are bounded by a constant number and each
1920
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
operation takes constant time to update the attribute values and
append the area list. Substep 2.3 iterates through all regions
once, thus taking maximum of O(n) time. Thus, Step 2 time
complexity is O(n)+ O(n)+ O(n
2)+ O(n)= O(n2).
Remark 2. The time complexity of Region Growing is O(n2).
Step 3: Monotonic Adjustments . Step 3 satisﬁes SUM
and COUNT constraints while maintaining the constraints that
have been satisﬁed in the previous steps. The SUM constraint
is used in the MP-regions problem, hence we build this step
based on the MP-regions construction algorithms [52]. How-
ever, because regions are initialized for the MIN, MAX, and
A VG constraints, adjustments are needed on both area level
and region level to satisfy the counting constraints. Because
SUM and COUNT constraints are monotonic, areas are added
to regions that fall under the lower bound or removed from
regions that go above the upper bound to make every region
valid. We iterate over constructed regions. For each region that
violates one of the SUM or COUNT constraints, the algorithm
ﬁrst tries to swap areas with neighbor regions without violating
the other constraints. The spatial contiguity of the region is
validated by ensuring that the donor region still forms a single
connected component after swapping. After no updates can
be made by swapping areas, the algorithm tries to merge
regions below the lower bounds or remove areas from regions
above the upper bounds. When no changes can be made, the
infeasible regions are removed, and the partition is considered
ﬁnalized for the construction phase.
Example: With the input shown in Figure 4a and the
example constraints c
4 =( SUM, s, 12, ∞ ) and c5 =
(COUNT,s, −∞ , 4), the region Rgreen = {a3,a 7} does
not satisfy c4. The boundary area with the neighbor region
Rblue = {a1,a 4,a 5,a 6} is a4. Area a4 is swapped from
Rblue to Rgreen after ensuring that both regions still satisfy
all the other constraints, and Rblue is spatially continuous
and still above the lower bound of c4. The result is de-
picted in Figure 4b. After swapping, the receiver region
R
green = {a4,a 5,a 7} satisﬁes all the constraints, so the
swapping attempts are terminated.
Complexity analysis. Each area is swapped at most once
because the region that becomes feasible after the swap keeps
the area to remain valid. Each swap updates and validates
all attributes of both the donor and receiver regions, which
takes O(2m) operations. Checking donor region connectivity
is O(n) in the worst case. As a result, the time complexity of
swapping is O((2m + n) × n)= O(n
2). The area removal of
regions that exceed the upper bounds and removing infeasible
regions take one O(n) pass each. Thus, the overall time
complexity is O(n
2)+ O(n)+ O(n)= O(n2).
Remark 3. The time complexity of Monotonic Adjustments is
O(n2).
C. Local Search Phase
The partition with the largest number of regions p is for-
warded from the construction phase to the local search phase to
optimize the overall regions’ heterogeneity. The local search
phase uses the Tabu search algorithm [23], a meta-heuristic
search algorithm, to minimize the overall heterogeneity.
In brief, the Tabu search algorithm keeps moving areas
among neighbor regions without violating the user-deﬁned
constraints in any region. Starting from the feasible partition
constructed in the construction phase, the Tabu search algo-
rithm moves to the best neighboring partition. Moving to a
solution that has worse total heterogeneity is allowed to escape
from the local optimal solution. The made moves are stored in
a tabu list, with a ﬁxed tabu tenure, and the reverse moves are
forbidden to prevent cycles. When a move leads to a partition
better than the best partition so far, the algorithm chooses this
move even if the tabu list prohibits it. The algorithm stops
when no better move can be made in a speciﬁed number of
steps, and the best partition found is returned as the ﬁnal result.
This phase does not change the number of regions p. Instead,
it still produces p regions but with better overall heterogeneity.
Complexity analysis. The Tabu search is an incomplete
algorithm, so we derive a complexity approximation based on
the parameters and the problem-speciﬁc neighborhood compu-
tation. Tabu search performs n iterations without heterogeneity
improvement and the counter resets on improvement, so the
total number of iterations is O(αn) in the worst case, where
α is the number of moves that beat the existing optimal
heterogeneity score. In each iteration, we update the valid
moves using a region connectivity check for each boundary
area in the region updated by the previous move, which takes
O(n × n) time in the worst case. A move attempt takes O(n)
to compute the pair-wise dissimilarity in the worst case. So,
the overall time complexity is O(αn × (n
2 + n)) = O(αn3).
Experimentally, the moves that improve heterogeneity happen
at an early stage of the local search, causing the total number
of iterations much smaller than 2n.
Remark 4. The time complexity of the Local Search phase is
O(αn
3), where α is the number of valid moves that improve
the heterogeneity over the existing optimum.
D. Handling Arbitrary Sets of Constraints
Our discussion so far assumes the incoming query contains
all types of constraints. However, it is common to have a subset
of these constraints. For example, a query could have only
one A VG constraint, or one MIN constraint and one COUNT
constraint. This section discusses how the Fa CT algorithm
handles queries with an arbitrary subset of constraints.
The Fa CT algorithm handles absent constraints as they
exist with an inﬁnite range (−∞ , ∞ ), which affects both the
feasibility and the construction phases. If a MIN/MAX con-
straint type is absent, the feasibility phase does not remove any
invalid areas under MIN/MAX, and Step 1 of the construction
phase selects all areas as the seed areas. If the A VG constraint
is missing, the Region Growing step adds all areas in seeds to
unassigned
avg and then initializes single-area regions. Areas
not in seeds are then added to unassigned avg and merged to
neighbor regions iteratively. If SUM/COUNT constraints are
1921
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
absent, Step 3 of the construction phase is omitted. Therefore,
designing the Fa CT algorithm with independent steps enables
it to effectively handle queries with any subset of constraints.
VI. C OMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
This section analyzes the time and space complexity of
the Fa CT algorithm. According to Remarks 1, 2, and 3 in
Section V -B, the time complexity of the feasibility and the
three steps of the construction phases are O(n), O(n
2), and
O(n2), respectively. Thus, the total time complexity of both
phases is O(n2). According to Remark 4 in Section V -C, the
time complexity of the Local Search phase is O(αn3). This
gives the overall worst-case time complexity of Fa CT as
O(αn3), where α is the total number of moves that improves
the existing optimal heterogeneity in the local search process.
For space complexity, the area set takes O(m × n) space to
store the n areas, each associated with m attributes assuming
there are m constraints. The space complexity for the seed area
selection is O(n). The Region Growing step stores temporary
regions with O(n) areas. After the region initialization, each
region is stored with m attributes and an area set. The regions
are disjoint, so the space taken by the region list is bounded
by O(m × n). The Monotonic Adjustments step and the Local
Search phase update the region list in place and does not
require additional space. Thus, the overall space complexity
is O(m × n).
VII. E XPERIMENT EV ALUA TION
This section presents an extensive experimental evaluation
of our proposed work to address the EMP problem. The
code and data for reproducing the results presented in this
section are publicly available [27]. The rest of the section
introduces the experimental setup (Section VII-A), studies
the impact of different constraints types and threshold ranges
on the performance (Section VII-B), shows the scalability of
the Fa CT algorithm (Section VII-C), and summarizes the
experimental results (Section VII-D).
A. Experimental Setup
EMP is a novel problem in the literature, so there is no direct
competitor to compare our techniques against. In addition, due
to the major enrichment EMP introduces to the MP-regions
problem, existing techniques that address MP-regions problem
cannot be trivially extended and adopted as baselines to
solve the EMP problem. Therefore, our experiments focus on
evaluating the performance and effectiveness of our proposed
work. We also study the impact of different combinations of
enriched constraints.
Evaluation datasets . We use nine real datasets that repre-
sent the census tracts of the USA, outlined as follows: (1) the
Los Angeles City (denoted as 1k) that includes 1012 areas,
(2) the Los Angeles County (denoted as 2k) that includes
2344 areas, (3) Southern California (denoted as 4k) as iden-
tiﬁed by the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) [45] that includes 3947 areas, (4) the State of Cali-
fornia (denoted as 8k) that includes 8049 areas, and (5) Five
multi-state datasets with ∼ 10k to ∼ 50k areas, as detailed in
Name No. of areas States
10k 10255 CA, NV , AZ
20k 20570 10k + OR, W A, ID, UT, MT, WY ,
CO, NM, OK, NE, SD, ND
30k 29887 20k +TX, LA, AR, MO, IA
40k 40214 30k + MN, MS, AL, TN, KY , IL, WI
50k 49943 40k + GA, IN, MI, OH, WV
TABLE I: Description of the multi-state datasets
Constraint Type Aggregate Attribute Range
Extrema MIN POP16UP (−∞ , 3000]
Centrality AV G EMPLOYED [1500,3500]
Counting SUM TOTALPOP [20000, ∞ )
TABLE II: Default attribute and ranges for different con-
straints.
Table I. Our default dataset is 2k. Typical evaluation datasets in
the existing literature have between 300-3000 areas [15], [52],
so our default dataset size is comparable to the largest datasets
in the literature. All datasets are joined with real attributes
from 2010 US census data about facts in each census tract.
All datasets share the same three spatial extensive attributes as
shown in Table II, one per constraint type, and the dissimilarity
attribute is HOUSEHOLDS. POP16UP attribute represents the
population with age sixteen or above. EMPLOYED attribute
refers to the employed population. TOTALPOP is the total
population. HOUSEHOLDS is the number of households in
each area, and it is used to measure region heterogeneity.
The evaluation attributes are selected based on factors that
inﬂuence the population growth rate [21], which makes the
partitions obtained through the experiments useful for studying
population growth. The shapeﬁles of the census tracts and the
attribute tables are provided by the US Census Bureau [9] and
SCAG [37] and joined using the QGIS software [42].
All experiments are based on Java 14 implementations using
an Intel Xeon W-2123(3.60 GHz) and 20GB RAM allocated
under Windows 10. We use three performance measures: the
runtime for both construction and local search phases, the
answer set size p, and improvement in regions’ heterogeneity,
deﬁned as the ratio of the absolute difference between the
heterogeneity score before and after the local search phase to
the heterogeneity score before the local search. Our parameters
include threshold range and dataset size. Unless mentioned
otherwise, the default dataset is 2k, area pickup criteria are
random, the A VG merge limit is three, the length of the tabu
list equals ten, and the maximum number of moves without
improvement for Tabu search equals the dataset size. The
default threshold ranges and attributes are shown in Table II
for each constraint type. For space limitation and similarity of
results on aggregates of the same type, we present results for
one aggregate function in each constraint type.
B. Impact of Constraints Types
This section studies the impact of different sets of con-
straints on regionalization performance. Sets of constraints
vary in terms of: (1) set size, i.e., number of constraints,
(2) types of constraints, and (3) threshold ranges. Sec-
tions VII-B1, VII-B2 and VII-B3 evaluate sets that include
MIN, A VG, and SUM constraints, respectively. MIN con-
1922
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
1
 2
 4
 8
 16
-∞ -2 -∞ -3.5-∞ -5
Time(s)
Range(x1000)
Tabu
M
MA
MS
MAS
Fig. 5: Runtime for MIN with
l = ∞
 0.125
 0.25
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
2-∞ 3.5-
∞
5-∞
Time(s)
Range(x1000)
Tabu
M
MS
MA
MAS
Fig. 6: Runtime for MIN with
u = ∞
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
3±0.53±1 3±1.53±2
Time(s)
Range(x1000)
Tabu
M
MS
MA
MAS
(a) V arying range lengths
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
10±10
20±10
30±10
40±10
Time(s)
Range(x1000)
Tabu
M
MS
MA
MAS
(b) V arying range midpoints
Fig. 7: Runtime for MIN with bounded l and u
straints are denoted as M, combinations of MIN and A VG
constraints are denoted as MA, combinations of MIN and SUM
constraints are denoted as MS, combinations of MIN, A VG,
and SUM constraints are denoted as MAS. Time of local search
is denoted as Tabu.
1) MIN Constraint: This section evaluates regionalization
queries with MIN constraints, c =( MIN,s ,l,u ), in combi-
nation with other constraint types. MIN and MAX constraints
perform two roles: ﬁltering invalid areas and selecting seed
areas, and both depend on the range threshold [l, u]. Hence,
we explore three cases: (a) ranges with l = −∞ , which show
the impact of u values on seed area selection, (b) ranges with
u = ∞ , which show the impact of l values on invalid area
ﬁltration, and (c) ranges with bounded values of l and u that
show their simultaneous impact.
Ranges with l = −∞ . Figure 5 shows the runtime of
the construction phase and Tabu search. The runtime highly
depends on the types of constraints. Table III gives the number
of regions p for different constraints combinations. In all
cases, the single MIN constraint, M, produces the maximum
of regions p that is bounded by the number of seed areas.
The p value increases with the increase of the upper bound
u.A s u increases, the number of seed areas increases and it
takes fewer iterations to partition the areas into regions, so the
runtime decreases in Figure 5. When the other constraints are
added, the regions in the ﬁnal result contain more than one
seed area, so p decreases. With more seed areas, the initialized
region becomes smaller and the SUM constraint takes more
operations to satisfy. This causes the runtime of MS and MAS
to increase by a small amount although the time for MIN and
A VG actually decreases. Increasing u leads to increasing the
heterogeneity improvement from 6.96% at u =2 k to 40.2%
at u =5 k due to higher p.
Ranges with u = ∞ . Table III shows the p values and
Figure 6 gives the construction time and local search time
for different constraint combinations. As we increase the
lower bound l, more invalid areas are ﬁltered out, while
typically the remaining areas are scattered. As a result, the
p value decreases, and hence runtime decreases signiﬁcantly
due to the lower number of regions. The heterogeneity score
improvement reduces as l increases with up to 17.6% due to
decreasing p that narrows the search space of the local search.
Ranges with bounded l and u. We explore bounded ranges
that vary the range length while ﬁxing the range midpoint.
Table III gives the p values and Figure 7a shows the runtime.
When the range length increases, the p value increases because
fewer areas are ﬁltered out and more regions are initialized.
As a result, both total and construction time increase due to
larger search space. However, there is no clear trend for the
Tabu search time.
For a range with a ﬁxed length and shifted midpoint to
a higher value, both construction time and local search time
decrease, as shown in Figure 7b. For larger values, the area set
is chopped into small connected components but the number
of seed areas is relatively stable. As a result, Steps 2 and 3
of the construction phase terminate faster and reduce runtime.
The p value depends on the correlation between attributes of
MIN and A VG constraints. If they are not correlated, then the
p value strictly decreases for larger midpoint values. When
they are correlated, p might increase or decrease, depending
on the correlation. In all cases, the heterogeneity improvement
increases when p increases, by up to 11.3% in this case.
2) A VG Constraint: The average aggregate function is non-
monotonic. Satisfying the constraint can be computationally
heavy with certain ranges. To illustrate this, we explore two
cases: (a) ranges with ﬁxed length and changing midpoints,
and (b) ranges with a ﬁxed midpoint but varying lengths.
Ranges with ﬁxed range length . In this experiment, the
length of the A VG range is ﬁxed to be 2k and the midpoint
shifts from 1k to 4.5k, with the step size = 0.5k. We focus on
the performance of the A VG constraint to exclude the impact
of other constraints. Figure 8 shows the distribution of the
A VG attribute value of the areas in the default dataset, which
is a positively skewed distribution. The A VG attribute values
of most of the areas are below 4k, but there are several outliers
with values up to 6149. Figure 9a shows the p value and
the number of unassigned areas (UA) for each range while
Figure 9b gives the runtime. When the midpoint is set to be
1k to 2.5k, about half of the areas lie within the given range
and it is also relatively easy to combine areas whose value is
outside the range. As a result, the number of unassigned areas
is reduced to 0 when the midpoint increases to 2k and 2.5k
but the runtime is below 3.2s. The ranges are also ﬂexible for
the Tabu search phase, with the heterogeneity score improved
by up to 30.1%. When the range is set to be 3k ± 1k, more
than half of the areas lie below l but it is possible to combine
them with one of the outliers whose attribute value is well
above the upper bound. In addition, as an area is assigned, the
newly formed region may lead to the possibility of assigning
the neighbor areas. Hence the enclave assignment process
continues for multiple iterations until no further update can
1923
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
Ranges wit hl=- ∞ Ranges with u = ∞ Ranges with bounded u and l
(-∞ ,2k] (-∞ ,3.5k] (-∞ ,5k] [2k,∞ ) [3.5k,∞ ) [5k,∞ ) [2.5k,3.5k] [2k,4k] [1.5k,4.5k] [1k,5k] [1k,2k] [2k,3k] [3k,4k] [4k,5k]
M 270 1447 2172 2074 898 173 834 1501 1895 2109 207 789 712 401
MS 184 354 365 342 142 12 281 334 356 362 159 307 215 78
MA 208 1037 1483 1593 812 97 776 1206 1398 1496 175 654 704 386
MAS 170 335 341 337 145 7 275 328 339 344 152 304 215 74
TABLE III: p values for different threshold ranges for MIN constraint combinations.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
 200
 0  1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Frequency
AVG Attribute value
Fig. 8: Distribution of
A VG attribute value
 0
 500
1000
1500
2000
2500
1±1 1.5
±1
2±1 2.5
±1
3±1 3.5
±1
4±1 4.5
±1
Range(x1000)
p
UA
(a) p and UA
 1
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
1±11.5
±1
2±12.5
±1
3±13.5
±1
4±14.5
±1
Time(s)
Range (x1000)
Tabu
A
(b) Runtime
Fig. 9: Impact different A VG range midpoints
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
3±0.53±1 3±1.53±2
p
Range(x1000)
A
MA
AS
MAS
(a) p
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 1400
 1600
3±0.53±1 3±1.53±2
unassigned areas
Range(x1000)
A
MA
AS
MAS
(b) Unassigned areas
Fig. 10: Impact different A VG range lengths
be made. As a result, it takes a much longer time, but the
percentage of unassigned areas is reduced signiﬁcantly to 9%.
When the midpoint is further increased to above 3.5k,i ti st o o
hard for the algorithm to form feasible regions as almost all
areas fall below the lower bound of the range. As a result, most
areas remain unassigned and the construction time becomes
much shorter as the algorithm quickly ﬁnds that no further
changes can be made. When the midpoint is above 3k, there
are limited feasible moves for the Tabu search because the
A VG constraint is too tight. As a result, the Tabu search time
is negligible and the heterogeneity improvements are below
0.4%.
Ranges with ﬁxed midpoint . Based on the observation
from the previous experiment, we set the midpoint to be 3k,
which is the most challenging setting for the algorithm, and
alter the length of the range. Combinations with the other
constraints are also included to demonstrate how the A VG
constraint can bottleneck the performance in special cases.
The p values for different constraint combinations are given in
Figure 10a and the runtime is shown in Figure 11. The ﬁgures
show increasing p values with longer ranges, but the runtime
depends on the range length. Different range lengths affect the
runtime signiﬁcantly, while different constraint combinations
with the same range have much less impact on the construction
time. This is because the runtime of the A VG step dominates
the total runtime of the construction phase. When the range is
3k ± 0.5k, the range is so tight that the algorithm quickly ﬁnds
no possible enclaves assignment, so the A VG step terminates
early. However, 60% of the areas remain unassigned, as
shown in Figure 10b. Similar to the previous experiment, the
range 3k ± 1k is the most challenging case and the runtime
dominates the other constraints. However, the reduction in the
number of unassigned areas is also signiﬁcant for all constraint
combinations. When the range is further enlarged, most of the
areas lie within the range and it is much easier to assign the
enclaves without merging. Thus, the time is much shorter, and
all areas are assigned as well. The ﬁnal heterogeneity score
also reduces when the range is enlarged due to the reduction
in region sizes. The heterogeneity improvement increases to
up to 21.8% because when the range is enlarged, it becomes
Ranges with u = ∞ Ranges with different lengths
[1k,∞ ) [10k,∞ ) [20k,∞ ) [30k,∞ ) [40k,∞ ) [15k, 25k] [10k,30k] [5k,35k]
MP 2298 717 373 245 185 N/A N/A N/A
S 2298 720 371 245 186 489 714 1358
MS 1056 581 342 237 179 408 567 785
AS 1545 642 345 233 177 445 640 1095
MAS 758 518 323 226 172 370 497 631
TABLE IV: p values for different threshold ranges for SUM
constraint combinations.
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
 256
 512
 1024
3±0.53±1 3±1.53±2
Time(s)
Range(x1000)
Tabu
A
MA
AS
MAS
Fig. 11: Runtime for A VG
with different range lengths
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
10-
∞
20-
∞
30-
∞
40-
∞
Time(s)
Range(x1000)
Tabu
MP
S
MS
AS
MAS
Fig. 12: Runtime for SUM
with u = ∞
easier to ﬁnd a valid move for the local search.
3) SUM Constraint: SUM constraints are the only type of
constraints that are used in existing state-of-the-art solutions
for the max-p regions (MP-regions) problem. We compare
with them, denoted as MP , using a single SUM constraint
with an open upper bound, i.e., [l, ∞ ). Table IV shows the p
values and Figures 12 and 13 give the runtime for different
constraint combinations with SUM aggregate. At u = ∞ ,
the p value decreases with increasing lower bound l while
runtime does not increase as much for both MP-regions and
Fa CT . According to Table IV, our Fa CT algorithm gives
comparable p value to MP-regions when the constraints are set
to be the same. The construction time is slightly higher due to
the overhead introduced by steps that validate the feasibility
of the query and handle the other constraints. However, due
to shorter tabu search time, the overall runtime of EMP is less
than half of the runtime for the MP-regions when u =3 0k or
40k. In addition, the Fa CT algorithm handles generic types
of constraints, which are not supported by the competitor. The
heterogeneity score increases when l increases, by up to 72.6%
for both MP-regions and the single constraint S, 13.8% for MS,
and less than 1% for AS and MAS due to the effect of A VG
1924
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
2
 4
 8
 16
20±5
20±10
20±15
Time(s)
Range(x1000)
Tabu
S
MS
AS
MAS
Fig. 13: Runtime for SUM
with a changing range length
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
 256
1k 2k 4k 8k
Time(s)
Dataset
Tabu
M
A
S
MA
MS
AS
MAS
Fig. 14: Runtime varying
datasets 1k to 4k
 0.25
 1
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
10k 20k 30k 40k 50k
Time(s)
Dataset
Tabu
M
A
S
MA
MS
AS
MAS
Fig. 15: Runtime varying
datasets for 10k-50k
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
 16384
1k 2k 4k 8k
Time(s)
Dataset
Tabu
A
MA
AS
MAS
Fig. 16: Runtime varying
datasets for A VG constraint
with range 3k ± 1k
constraint. Increasing the region’s size provides local search
with more potential moves, hence it better improves overall
heterogeneity. For bounded threshold ranges, in Table IV and
Figure 13, both p values and construction runtime decrease
when the lower bound l increases and the trend is similar to
u = ∞ . The heterogeneity score increases by up to 30.4%
for S, 6.9% for MS, 3.76% for AS, and 2.49% for MAS,
with increasing range length due to the larger region size.
However, the unassigned areas could reach up to 25.1% when
u is bounded for MS, AS, and MAS. This is because areas
are removed so that each region does not exceed u. Fa CT
algorithm reports output statistics to users so they are equipped
with information about the impact of different threshold ranges
on the given dataset, and are able to tune query parameters
insightfully.
C. FaCT Scalability
This section discusses the scalability of the Fa CT algo-
rithm. We run the algorithm for different constraint com-
binations with the default threshold values on the nine
evaluation datasets. The dataset size of the 50k dataset is
17 times the largest dataset used in the existing literature of
regionalization [15], [52]. As the A VG constraint is identiﬁed
as a clear performance bottleneck when the range is set to
be 3k ± 1k , our discussion contains two parts. The ﬁrst part
shows the results for the constraint combinations with the A VG
set to be default range (Figure 14 and Figure 15) to show the
scalability of Fa CT in normal cases, while in the second
part we focus on constraint combinations including A VG with
range 3k ± 1k (Figure 16) to see how the computation of the
A VG constraint scales in extreme cases.
Figure 14 and 15 show that when the A VG constraint is not
the bottleneck, the runtime increases linearly with the input
size for M and quadratically for the other constraints. For
all datasets, Fa CT provides a very acceptable runtime for
regionalization applications.
Figure 16 shows that when the range of the A VG is set to
be 3k ± 1k, A VG constraints increase the construction time to
a large extent. For other datasets, the runtime increases with
increasing input size at a much higher rate than the previous
experiment, which implies less scalability advantage for A VG
constraint. The construction runtime does not strictly increase
with increasing the input size. The construction time for the
4k dataset is shorter than that for the 2k dataset, except for AS
and MAS. This difference is caused by the merging procedure
in the A VG constraint. Generally, more areas are easier to
aggregate in regions that satisfy the A VG constraint. In all
cases, the construction time scales much better than the Tabu
time, and it still provides a solution with almost the same
quality.
D. Summary Of Results
All experiments show that the Fa CT algorithm can efﬁ-
ciently produce feasible solutions of high quality in a few
seconds for the vast majority of the cases. In addition, the
Fa CT algorithm supports relatively large datasets that serve
all existing applications. When more areas are ﬁltered or fewer
seed areas are identiﬁed by the extrema constraints, both p and
the runtime tend to decrease. The behavior of the centrality
constraint depends on the range speciﬁed and the distribution
of the attributes. However, it shows reasonable performance
in the vast majority of the cases. The counting constraints can
formulate the MP-regions problem as a sub-problem of EMP
and gives comparable scalability and result quality.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces an enriched max-p (EMP) region-
alization problem that extends the existing regionalization
problems with SQL-inspired user-deﬁned constraints. The
EMP problem clusters a set of spatial areas into homogeneous
regions that satisfy the user-deﬁned constraints. The EMP
problem enables enriched types of constraints that support
SQL-inspired aggregate functions, MIN, MAX, A VG, SUM,
and COUNT, with range operators. We prove the NP-hardness
of the EMP problem. To tackle this problem, we propose
Fa CT ; a three-phase algorithm that ﬁnds an approximate
solution with a maximum number of regions and minimum
overall heterogeneity. The ﬁrst phase checks the feasibility of
ﬁnding a solution given the input constraints. It also provides
users with insightful information to tune their input and enable
ﬂexible exploration for various datasets. The second phase
constructs an initial solution, and the third phase further
optimizes it to provide a ﬁnal solution. We have empirically
demonstrated the capability of Fa CT to provide efﬁcient and
effective performance on various real datasets.
For future work, we explore multi-objective optimization
methods and further improve the algorithm performance
through parallelization.
1925
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
REFERENCES
[1] NP-hardness of MP-regions. https://cs.ucr.edu/ ∼amr/MP
Regionalization NPHardness.pdf, 2021.
[2] K. Andreev and H. Racke. Balanced graph partitioning. Theory of
Computing Systems , 39(6):929–939, 2006.
[3] M. P . Armstrong, G. Rushton, R. Honey, B. T. Dalziel, P . Lolonis, S. De,
and P . J. Densham. Decision Support for Regionalization: A Spatial
Decision Support System for Regionalizing Service Delivery Systems.
CEUS, 15:37–53, 1991.
[4] D. Arribas-Bel and C. R. Schmidt. Self-Organizing Maps and the US
Urban Spatial Structure. EPB, 40:362–371, 2013.
[5] R. M. Assunc ¸ ˜ao, M. C. Neves, G. C ˆamara, and C. da Costa Freitas. Ef-
ﬁcient regionalization techniques for socio-economic geographical units
using minimum spanning trees. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science , 20(7):797–811, 2006.
[6] O. Aydin, M. V . Janikas, R. Assunc ¸ ˜ao, and T.-H. Lee. Skater-con:
Unsupervised regionalization via stochastic tree partitioning within a
consensus framework using random spanning trees. In Proceedings of
the 2nd ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on AI for Geographic
Knowledge Discovery , pages 33–42, 2018.
[7] R. Benedetti, F. Piersimoni, G. Pignataro, and F. Vidoli. The Identi-
ﬁcation of Spatially Constrained Homogeneous Clusters of Covid-19
Transmission in Italy. RSPP, 12:1169–1187, 2020.
[8] N. Bullen, G. Moon, and K. Jones. Deﬁning localities for health
planning: a gis approach. Social Science & Medicine , 42(6):801–816,
1996.
[9] U. C. Bureau. Explore census data. https://data.census.gov/cedsci/.
[10] J. Byfuglien and A. Nordg ˚ard. Region-building—a comparison of
methods. Norwegian Journal of Geography , 1973.
[11] M. Camacho-Collados, F. Liberatore, and J. M. Angulo. A multi-criteria
police districting problem for the efﬁcient and effective design of patrol
sector. European journal of operational research, 246(2):674–684, 2015.
[12] Z. Chen, P . Cheng, L. Chen, X. Lin, and C. Shahabi. Fair task assignment
in spatial crowdsourcing. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment ,
13(12):2479–2492, 2020.
[13] K. S. Cheruvelil, P . A. Soranno, M. T. Bremigan, T. Wagner, and S. L.
Martin. Grouping Lakes for Water Quality Assessment and Monitoring:
The Roles of Regionalization and Spatial Scale. JEM, 41:425–440, 2008.
[14] J. H. Danumah, S. N. Odai, B. M. Saley, J. Szarzynski, M. Thiel,
A. Kwaku, F. K. Kouame, and L. Y . Akpa. Flood risk assessment and
mapping in abidjan district using multi-criteria analysis (ahp) model and
geoinformation techniques,(cote d’ivoire). Geoenvironmental Disasters,
3(1):1–13, 2016.
[15] J. C. Duque, L. Anselin, and S. J. Rey. The max-p-regions problem.
Journal of Regional Science , 52(3):397–419, 2012.
[16] J. C. Duque, R. L. Church, and R. S. Middleton. The p-regions problem.
Geographical Analysis , 43(1):104–126, 2011.
[17] J. C. Duque, J. E. Patino, L. A. Ruiz, and J. E. Pardo-Pascual. Measuring
Intra-urban Poverty Using Land Cover and Texture Metrics Derived from
Remote Sensing Data. LUP, 135:11–21, 2015.
[18] A. El Kenawy, J. I. L ´opez-Moreno, and S. M. Vicente-Serrano. Summer
Temperature Extremes in Northeastern Spain: Spatial Regionalization
and Links to Atmospheric Circulation (1960–2006). TAC, 113:387–405,
2013.
[19] A. Ferligoj and V . Batagelj. Clustering with relational constraint.
Psychometrika, 47(4):413–426, 1982.
[20] D. C. Folch and S. E. Spielman. Identifying regions based on ﬂexible
user-deﬁned constraints. International Journal of Geographical Infor-
mation Science , 28(1):164–184, 2014.
[21] R. Fragoso, C. Rego, and V . Bushenkov. Clustering of territorial areas:
A multi-criteria districting problem. Journal of Quantitative Economics ,
14(2):179–198, 2016.
[22] R. S. Garﬁnkel and G. L. Nemhauser. Optimal political districting by
implicit enumeration techniques. Management Science , 16(8):B–495,
1970.
[23] F. Glover and M. Laguna. Tabu search. In Handbook of combinatorial
optimization, pages 2093–2229. Springer, 1998.
[24] A. Gordon. A survey of constrained classiﬁcation. Computational
Statistics & Data Analysis , 21(1):17–29, 1996.
[25] L. Gurobi Optimization. Gurobi optimizer reference manual, 2018.
[26] P . Hansen, B. Jaumard, C. Meyer, B. Simeone, and V . Doring. Maximum
split clustering under connectivity constraints. Journal of Classiﬁcation ,
20(2):143–180, 2003.
[27] Y . Kang. Fact. https://github.com/Y unfanKang/FaCT, 2021.
[28] Y . Kang. Modeling the enriched Max-P region problem asa Mixed-
integer programming problem. https://github.com/Y unfanKang/FaCT/
blob/main/EMP-MIP/EMP
MIP Formulation.pdf, 2022.
[29] Y . Kang. Solving the MIP formulation of EMP with Gurobi solver.
https://github.com/Y unfanKang/FaCT/blob/main/EMP-MIP/, 2022.
[30] H. Kim, Y . Chun, and K. Kim. Delimitation of Functional Regions
Using a P-Regions Problem Approach. IRSR, 38:235–263, 2015.
[31] K. Kim, Y . Chun, and H. Kim. p-Functional Clusters Location Problem
for Detecting Spatial Clusters with Covering Approach. Geographical
Analysis, 49:101–121, 2017.
[32] J. Laura, W. Li, S. J. Rey, and L. Anselin. Parallelization of a
Regionalization Heuristic in Distributed Computing Platforms–a Case
Study of Parallel-P-Compact-Regions Problem. IJGIS, 29:536–555,
2015.
[33] L. P . Lefkovitch. Conditional clustering. Biometrics, pages 43–58, 1980.
[34] W. Li, R. L. Church, and M. F. Goodchild. An Extendable Heuristic
Framework to Solve the P-Compact-Regions Problem for Urban Eco-
nomic Modeling. CEUS, 43:1–13, 2014.
[35] W. Li, R. L. Church, and M. F. Goodchild. The p-Compact-Regions
Problem. Geographical Analysis , 46:250–273, 2014.
[36] F. Murtagh. A survey of algorithms for contiguity-constrained clustering
and related problems. The computer journal , 28(1):82–88, 1985.
[37] S. C. A. of Governments. Scag open data portal. https://gisdata-scag.
opendata.arcgis.com/.
[38] S. Openshaw. A regionalisation program for large data sets. Computer
Applications, 3(4):136–147, 1973.
[39] S. Openshaw. A geographical solution to scale and aggregation problems
in region-building, partitioning and spatial modelling. Transactions of
the institute of british geographers , pages 459–472, 1977.
[40] S. Openshaw. Classifying and regionalizing census data. Census users’
handbook, pages 239–270, 1995.
[41] J. E. Patino, J. C. Duque, J. E. Pardo-Pascual, and L. A. Ruiz. Using
Remote Sensing to Assess the Relationship Between Crime and the
Urban Layout. Applied Geography , 55:48–60, 2014.
[42] Welcome to the QGIS project! https://www.qgis.org/, 2020. May 2020.
[43] S. J. Rey and M. L. Sastr ´e-Guti´errez. Interregional Inequality Dynamics
in Mexico. SEA, 5:277–298, 2010.
[44] D. J. Rossiter and R. J. Johnston. Program group: the identiﬁcation of all
possible solutions to a constituency-delimitation problem. Environment
and Planning A , 13(2):231–238, 1981.
[45] Southern California Association of Governments - SCAG. https://scag.
ca.gov/, 2020. May 2020.
[46] S. Sch ¨onbrodt-Stitt, A. Bosch, T. Behrens, H. Hartmann, X. Shi, and
T. Scholten. Approximation and Spatial Regionalization of Rainfall
Erosivity Based on Sparse Data in a Mountainous Catchment of the
Y angtze River in Central China. JESPR, 20:6917–6933, 2013.
[47] B. She, J. C. Duque, and X. Y e. The network-max-p-regions model.
IJGIS, 31:962–981, 2017.
[48] T. Song, Y . Tong, L. Wang, J. She, B. Y ao, L. Chen, and K. Xu.
Trichromatic online matching in real-time spatial crowdsourcing. In
2017 IEEE 33rd International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) ,
pages 1009–1020. IEEE, 2017.
[49] S. E. Spielman and D. C. Folch. Reducing Uncertainty in the American
Community Survey through Data-driven Regionalization. PloS ONE ,
10:e0115626, 2015.
[50] D. A. Stow, C. D. Lippitt, and J. R. Weeks. Geographic Object-
based Delineation of Neighborhoods of Accra, Ghana using QuickBird
Satellite Imagery. PE&RS, 76:907–914, 2010.
[51] T. Vilutien ˙e and E. K. Zavadskas. The application of multi-criteria
analysis to decision support for the facility management of a residential
district. Journal of Civil Engineering and Management , 9(4):241–252,
2003.
[52] R. Wei, S. Rey, and E. Knaap. Efﬁcient Regionalization for Spatially
Explicit Neighborhood Delineation. IJGIS, 35:1–17, 2020.
[53] S. Y anık, J. Kalcsics, S. Nickel, and B. Bozkaya. A multi-period
multi-criteria districting problem applied to primary care scheme with
gradual assignment. International Transactions in Operational Research,
26(5):1676–1697, 2019.
[54] X. Y e, B. She, and S. Benya. Exploring Regionalization in the Network
Urban Space. JGSA, 2:4, 2018.
1926
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.