380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
IMS: Incremental Max-P Regionalization With
Statistical Constraints
Y unfan Kang , Yiyang Bian , Qinma Kang, and Amr Magdy , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—Spatial regionalization is the process of grouping a set
of spatial areas into spatially contiguous and homogeneous regions.
This paper introduces an Incremental Max-P regionalization with
statistical constraints (IMS) problem; a regionalization process that
supports enriched user-deﬁned constraints based on statistical ag-
gregate functions and supports incremental updates. In addition
to enabling richer constraints, it allows users to employ multiple
constraints simultaneously to signiﬁcantly push the expressiveness
and effectiveness of the existing regionalization literature. The
IMS problem is NP-hard and signiﬁcantly enriches the existing
regionalization problems. Such a major enrichment introduces sev-
eral challenges in both feasibility and scalability. To address these
challenges, we propose the FaC Talgorithm, a three-phase heuristic
approach that ﬁnds a feasible set of spatial regions that satisfy
IMS constraints while supporting large datasets compared to the
existing literature. FaC Tsupports local and global incremental up-
dates when there are changes in attribute values or constraints. In
addition, we incorporate the Iterated Greedy algorithm with FaC T
to further improve the solution quality of the IMS problem and
the classical max-p regions problem. Our extensive experimental
evaluation has demonstrated the effectiveness and scalability of our
techniques on several real datasets.
Index Terms—Spatial, regionalization, max-P, aggregate.
I. I NTRODUCTION
R
EGIONALIZATION is the process of clustering a set
of areas into spatially contiguous and homogeneous re-
gions. Unlike traditional clustering of multi-dimensional points,
the basic units in regionalization are spatial polygons that are
grouped based on both attribute values and adjacency in space.
Regionalization is widely used in numerous applications such as
epidemic analysis [1], service delivery systems[2], water quality
assessment [3], weather temperature classiﬁcation [4], rainfall
erosivity estimation [5], health data analysis [6], spatial crowd-
sourcing [7], [8], and constituency allocation [9]. A fundamen-
tal challenge in regionalization is determining the appropriate
Received 27 August 2024; revised 9 October 2025; accepted 12 October 2025.
Date of publication 15 October 2025; date of current version 25 November 2025.
This work was partially supported by National Science Foundation, USA, under
Grant IIS-2237348 and Grant CNS-2031418, in part by Google-CAHSI, and in
part by Microsoft unrestricted gift. Recommended for acceptance by A. Asudeh.
(Corresponding author: Yunfan Kang.)
Y unfan Kang is with the Cyber GIS Center for Advanced Digital and Spa-
tial Studies, Department of Geography & GIS, University of Illinois Urbana
Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA (e-mail: yfkang@illinois.edu).
Yiyang Bian and Amr Magdy are with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521 USA
(e-mail: ybian011@ucr.edu; amr@cs.ucr.edu).
Qinma Kang is with the Department of Computer Science, School of Me-
chanical, Electrical and Information Engineering, Shandong University, Weihai
264209, China (e-mail: qmkang@sdu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TKDE.2025.3621843
Fig. 1. Spatialscale mismatch in U.S. climate data: (a) statelevel snowfall
(≈50 regions) vs. (b) countylevel temperature (≈3 000 regions).
spatial scale for the phenomenon under study. For example, as
shown in Fig. 1,1 different climate variables can exhibit distinct
spatial patterns. Season-accumulated snowfall shows strong
coherence across large geographic units—aggregating at the
state level (≈50 regions) sufﬁciently captures regional variation.
In contrast, the mean annual temperature varies sharply at ﬁner
scales, necessitating county-level granularity (≈3,000 regions)
to resolve meaningful patterns. This spatial-scale mismatch un-
derscores the need for adaptive regionalization techniques that
account for the intrinsic heterogeneity of different attributes.
However, most existing methods require users to manually
specify the number of regions, placing a burden on analysts to
try multiple values, which increases the computational cost and
limits the query expressiveness.
The latest regionalization formulation, called the max-p-
regions problem (or MP-regions), has addressed the scale prob-
lem [10] and is widely used across applications [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15], [16], [17]. With the observation that researchers
usually know a condition that a region must satisfy to be suitable
for the analysis, the MP-regions automatically ﬁnds the max-
imum number of regions satisfying a user-deﬁned constraint,
without requiring users to input p. In many critical applications,
from analyzing a pandemic like COVID-19 to designing sales
territories, the ideal number of regions is unknown beforehand.
Fixing the number of regions, p, in advance, as required by
traditional clustering, imposes an arbitrary structure that can
obscure meaningful insights. This focus on maximizing p is
therefore not merely a technical detail; it is the critical mech-
anism that drives a truly data-driven and objective partition-
ing. By pushing p to its maximum possible value—subject to
essential constraints such as spatial contiguity and minimum
attribute thresholds—the model is forced to reveal the most
1Source: NOAA NOHRSC (2023–24 seasonal snowfall) and PRISM Climate
Group (1991–2020 mean annual temperature).
1041-4347 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 381
granular and meaningful spatial structure inherent in the data. It
is fundamental to achieving the highest possible resolution for
local pattern discovery and ensuring the most equitable founda-
tion for fair resource allocation. The power of this approach
is evidenced by its adoption in leading geospatial software,
including ESRI ArcGIS Pro[18] and PySAL [19]. As introduced
in the MP-regions formulation [10], maximizing the number of
regions reveals ﬁne-grained spatial structure but does not, on its
own, ensure meaningful partitions. To address this, minimizing
intra-region heterogeneity is incorporated as a secondary ob-
jective, promoting internally coherent clusters with consistent
characteristics. This further enhances analytical robustness and
guards against arbitrary groupings. In this two-fold framework,
region count drives the partition’s resolution, while homogeneity
serves as a reﬁnement and tie-breaking criterion to select the
most interpretable solution.
However, the MP-regions problem has several limitations in
both scalability and expressiveness. Currently, the state-of-the-
art algorithms take 3-60 minutes to process a dataset with ∼3k
areas, depending on the threshold value. As a result, existing
real applications, listed above, use relatively small data, ranging
from tens of areas [13], [15], [20] to only a few hundred [11],
[12], [14], [16], [17]. It is explicitly stated in [16] that to use
the MP-regions algorithms “ one must be willing to reduce the
number of geographic units of analysis.” Such severe scalability
limitations prevent the existing MP-regions formulation from
supporting a wide variety of user-deﬁned constraints that enable
users to express ﬂexible regionalization queries for various
applications.
More fundamentally, the problem of expressiveness is a
structural limitation of the classic MP-regions formulation. Its
reliance on a single, lower-bound SUM constraint on one at-
tribute precludes common analytical queries that require mul-
tiple simultaneous conditions, range-based thresholds, or non-
monotonic functions like A VG or V AR. However, real-world
applications often require multiple, complex constraints simulta-
neously. Effective COVID-19 analysis may target regions with a
total population≥200000, an average monthly income between
$3000 to $5000, and public transportation use ≥ 10000 [1].
Similarly, population studies may combine metrics like mini-
mum population, maximum school drop-out rate, and the aver-
age age—to form meaningful regions [13]. Other applications,
like designing police patrol sectors, also depend on balancing
multiple criteria [20]. In addition, internal consistency—like
low variance in key indicators—is important for effective re-
gionalization. For instance, during COVID-19, grouping areas
with similar infection rates helped ensure consistent policies and
resource allocation [1]. However, in cases like equity planning
or urban–rural integration, allowing higher variance can sup-
port broader goals. These examples show the need for ﬂexible,
user-deﬁned constraints, such as adjustable variance thresholds,
which traditional MP-regions methods do not support. Enhanc-
ing their expressiveness is therefore necessary. Such applica-
tions highlight the need to enhance MP-regions’ expressiveness,
which currently lacks support for advanced user-deﬁned con-
straints.
This paper introduces the Incremental Max-P regionalization
with statistical constraints (IMS) problem, which addresses
the existing MP-regions limitations. IMS is designed to han-
dle signiﬁcantly larger datasets and enriches regionalization
queries with four novel features: (1) a full suite of SQL-inspired
aggregate functions (MIN, MAX, A VG, V AR, SUM, COUNT),
(2) support for range-based comparisons ( ≤,
≥, and between),
(3) the use of multiple simultaneous constraints, and (4) efﬁcient
incremental updates for explorative analysis.
The IMS problem is NP-hard (see Section IV), so ﬁnding
an optimal solution is intractable. An exact MIP solver [21],
[22] fails to solve an instance with just 25 areas in a reasonable
time [23]. Even ﬁnding an approximate solution is challenging
due to: (1) non-monotonic constraints (e.g., A VG, V AR), where
adding or removing an area gives no guarantee of satisfying the
constraint, and (2) the risk of forming oversized regions, which
contradicts the primary objective of maximizing the number of
regions,p.
To address these challenges, we introduce FaCT, a three-
phase algorithm for IMS. The ﬁrst phase derives bounds to
check feasibility under user-deﬁned constraints. If infeasible,
it suggests how users can adjust the data to satisfy constraints.
This ﬂexibility supports adaptive tuning and exploratory analysis
across datasets. The second phase constructs a feasible solution
that satisﬁes constraints while maximizing p.
To handle the challenge of non-monotonic constraints, this
phase is divided into three independent steps, each dedicated
to a speciﬁc constraint family. The steps are designed with the
following features: (a) Each step targets a speciﬁc constraint
type to maximize p. (b) Step order reduces search space and
constraint conﬂicts. (c) The independent steps handle arbitrary
constraint combinations and updates.
To mitigate the challenge of oversized regions, which hinders
maximizingp, FaCT adopts a seed-based growing strategy with
bounded merging. Each step initiates region growth from diverse
seeds, which deﬁne an upper bound on the achievable p, and
restricts merging based on aggregation properties. This ensures
that regions remain compact and feasible, preserving the primary
objective of maximizing the number of valid regions. In addition,
FaCT also offers (d) parameter tuning for different use cases,
and (e) datasets with multiple connected components, while
the MP-regions formulation supports only a single connected
component. The third phase of FaCT performs a local search
adapting the Tabu search [24] and swapping areas between
regions to improve the overall heterogeneity of the regions.
This paper is a major extension of our work in[25]. Firstly, we
introduced the novel variance constraint with range operators,
advancing regionalization expressiveness. It also opens opportu-
nities for improving related methods. The integration ofvariance
constraint poses substantial computational challenges due to its
complexity, yet it signiﬁcantly enhances the expressiveness of
regionalization, enabling a broader spectrum of applications and
analysis tasks. Secondly, the algorithm framework is modiﬁed to
support global and local incremental updates, enabling fast query
revisions without full recomputation. The incremental updates
also allow users to reconﬁgure the scale of the regions efﬁciently,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
382 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
better addressing the scaling issue, which is a major concern
of the regionalization problems and the core motivation for
the MP-regions problem. Thirdly, we integrate Iterated Greedy,
which improves both IMS and the widely used MP-regions
formulation. This highlights the potential of metaheuristics in
regionalization and spatial analysis.
Our experimental evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness
of FaCT on real datasets. We evaluate the impact of different
threshold ranges, different combinations of constraints, and the
scalability to process datasets. Our contributions are summa-
rized as follows:
r We deﬁne an incremental max-p regions problem with
statistical constraints (IMS) that reveals the full potential
of max-p regionalization.
r We prove the NP-hardness of the IMS problem.
r We propose FaCT; a three-phase heuristic algorithm that
provides approximate solutions for the IMS problem and
responds to the updates in attributes and constraints effec-
tively and efﬁciently.
r We introduce FaCT-IG, the combination of the iterated
algorithm and the FaCT construction to further improve
thep value of the IMS and the MP-regions problem.
r We perform an extensive experimental evaluation that
shows the effectiveness of our techniques on real datasets.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the related work. Section III deﬁnes the problem and
Section IV proves its NP-hardness. Our proposed solution is
detailed in Section V, and its time and space complexity are
analyzed in Section VI. Section IX shows the experimental
evaluations and Section X concludes the paper.
II. R ELA TEDWORK
The regionalization problem originates from the demand for
aggregating homogeneous regions in the analytical tasks per-
formed by social scientists and statisticians [26]. Regionaliza-
tion is referred to by different names, including region build-
ing [27], conditional clustering [28], clustering with relational
constraints [26], contiguity-constrained clustering [29], con-
strained classiﬁcation [30], maximum split clustering under con-
nectivity constraints [31], and p-regions problem [32], [33] that
is used in a variety of applications such as detecting functional
regions [34], [35], network-constrained urban management[36],
and partitioning compact regions [37], [38], [39]. The max-
p-regions problem (MP-regions) [10] has been introduced to
eliminate the requirement for inputting the number of regions in
advance. It aggregates areas into a maximum number of regions
so that each region satisﬁes a single user-deﬁned constraint with
a summation aggregate, e.g., total population ≥ 20K. Existing
variants [13], [40], [41] use the road network-based connectivity
as an additional spatial constraint to aggregate regions or use
multiple attributes to impose the constraint. However, all exist-
ing variants still support only a single constraint of one type as
the MP-regions problem.
Existing regionalization techniques that perform multi-
criteria districting [13], [20], [42], [43], [44] use multi-objective
optimization to partition the space based on multiple attributes.
These techniques still put the burden on the user to determine
the spatial scale, i.e., the number of output regions. Additionally,
they allow the user to deﬁne only a single constraint on one
attribute, which limits query expressiveness. Our IMS problem
addresses these limitations by enabling users to deﬁne multiple
constraints across different attributes, thereby providing more
ﬂexible and expressive queries. Furthermore, it inherits the au-
tomatic discovery of the appropriate number of regions from the
MP-regions approach, effectively resolving the issue of spatial
scale.
We classify the popular approaches to tackle the NP-hard
regionalization problems into two main categories. The ﬁrst
category is the clustering methods [45], [46] with two phases.
The ﬁrst phase clusters the centroids of polygons using a
traditional clustering algorithm. The second phase then im-
poses the spatial connectivity constraint to ensure that each
region is geographically connected. The second category adopts
a two-phase contiguity-constrained heuristic optimization ap-
proach [10], [41], [47], [48], [49], [50]
. The set of spatial areas is
usually represented by a graph that encodes the spatial contiguity
relationships. With the spatial contiguity constraint imposed
explicitly, a feasible initial solution is constructed in the ﬁrst
phase and then optimized using heuristic or mixed-heuristic
search methods in the second phase. The construction methods
include tree partition [47], [51] and greedy aggregation [10],
[40], [48], [49], [50]. The heuristic search phase optimizes the
objective function to improve the region homogeneity[47], [48],
[50], [51] or geographical compactness [48] without violating
the contiguity constraint.
Our work follows the second category of contiguity-
constrained heuristic optimization search. We consider multiple
constraints with different aggregate functions that do not exist
in the literature, so none of the existing methods can obtain a
feasible solution that satisﬁes our enriched constraints.
III. P
ROBLEM DEFINITION
This section formally deﬁnes the incremental max-p region-
alization with statistical constraints (IMS) problem. Let A =
{a1,a 2,...,a n} denotes the set of areas. Each areaai is deﬁned
by four attributes:ai=(i,b i,S i,d i), wherei is the area identiﬁer,
bi is an arbitrary spatial polygon that deﬁnes the area’s spatial
boundaries, Si is a set of spatially extensive attributes and di is
a dissimilarity attribute. The dissimilarity attribute di is used
in computing output regions’ heterogeneity. The rest of the
section presents basic deﬁnitions, then deﬁnes the IMS problem
formally.
Deﬁnition III.1 (User-deﬁned Constraint). A user-deﬁned
constraint c is a condition that is deﬁned as “ l ≤f (s) ≤u”o r
“f (s) ∈[l,u ]”. c is identiﬁed with a 4-tuple: ( f,s,l,u ), where
f is an aggregate function, s is a spatially extensive attribute,
l ∈[−∞,∞) is a number that represents a lower bound, and
u ∈(−∞,∞] is a number that represents an upper bound.
IMS allows f to be MIN, MAX, A VG, V AR, SUM, or
COUNT that computes minimum, maximum, average, variance,
summation, and count aggregates, respectively, with the same
semantics as the SQL standards. Following standard deﬁnitions
in the regionalization literature [10], [52] and cartography [53],
we deﬁne s as a spatially extensive attribute (e.g., population,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 383
total income) that is additive and scales with the size of the
spatial unit. For example, the population value of a state is
divided over its cities, so the population is a spatially extensive
attribute. In contrast, spatially intensive attributes [53], such as
temperature, are normalized or averaged values that capture
relative characteristics independent of area size. Examples of
s include the population, labor force, and households in each
area. When l = −∞, the range has an open-ended lower bound
and the constraint becomes f (s) ≤u. Similarly, when u = ∞,
it becomes f (s) ≥l.
Deﬁnition III.2 (Region). Ar e g i o nR is a set of g areas:
R = {a1,a 2,...,a g}, such that: (1) g ≥1, i.e., R contains at
least one area. (2) Areas in R are spatially contiguous, i.e., ∀
ai,a j ∈R, ∃a sequence of areas ( ak,...,a l) s.t. both (ai, ak)
and (al, aj ) are spatial neighbors, and every two consecutive
areas in the sequence are spatial neighbors.
Deﬁnition III.3 (Heterogeneity). Heterogeneity H(P ) of a
set of regions P is deﬁned as:
H(P )=
∑
∀R∈P
∑
∀ai ,aj∈R
|di −dj| (1)
While (1) deﬁnes heterogeneity using a speciﬁc, widely ac-
cepted formulation from the regionalization literature[10], [11],
[13], [14], [15], [16], [52], our framework is not limited to this
measure. The optimization of H(p) occurs during the ﬂexible
local search phase in Section V, which can easily accommodate
alternative heterogeneity deﬁnitions, including measures based
on multi-attribute dissimilarity.
IMS Problem: The IMS problem is deﬁned as follows:
Input: Given: (1) A set ofn areas:A = {a1,a 2,...,a n}.( 2 )A
set of user-deﬁned constraints C = {c1,c 2,...,c m}.
Output: (1) A set of regions P = {R1,R 2,...,R p}, where
1 ≤p ≤n and each region Ri satisﬁes the below IMS con-
straints and objectives. (2) A set U0 = A−⋃p
i=1 Ri, i.e., U0
contains all areas that are not assigned to any feasible regionRi,
∀1 ≤i ≤p. Areas in U0 may not be spatially contiguous.
IMS Constraints:
r Ri ∩Rj = ∅, ∀Ri,R j ∈P ∧i ̸= j
r Ri satisﬁes all constraintscj ∈C,∀1 ≤i ≤p, 1 ≤j ≤m
Objectives:
r Maximizing the number of regions p.
r Minimizing regions’ overall heterogeneity H(P ).
IMS has two objectives. In case they contradict during build-
ing the output regions, the ﬁrst objective (maximizing the num-
ber of regions) is favored over the second one (minimizing re-
gions’ heterogeneity). This allows users to obtain the maximum
number of desirable regions without providing the number of
regions as an input, as favored by the domain experts[10], which
addresses a major limitation in the previous regionalization
problems. The second objective uses a dissimilarity attribute
that is not necessarily a spatial attribute. For example, social
scientists may produce regions that are homogeneous in terms
of average income level.
To clarify the distinction from MP-regions, we highlight
two fundamental differences that arise from IMS’s enriched
constraints. First, the enriched constraints are not always mono-
tonic. Assuming all spatially extensive attribute values are pos-
itive, adding or removing an area in MP-regions guarantees a
monotonic change toward satisfying the constraint threshold.
This is not the case for IMS due to its support for A VG, V AR,
MIN, and MAX constraints. Additionally, IMS allows upper-
bounded threshold ranges, meaning that adding areas without
further validation can violate the upper bound of SUM and
COUNT constraints. Second, unlike MP-regions, IMS allows
unassigned areas U
0 to exist in the ﬁnal partition. This design
choice makes it possible to handle more complex and poten-
tially conﬂicting constraint combinations. In IMS, allowing
unassigned areas is a necessary design choice, not a formal
optimization objective. It allows the algorithm to effectively han-
dle complex constraint combinations without forcing infeasible
assignments. For instance, MIN/MAX constraints act as ﬁlters,
while non-monotonic A VG/V AR constraints require delicate
balancing; forcing all areas into regions under these conditions
could lead to violations or distort statistical patterns. While our
algorithm strives to assign as many areas as possible, its primary
objectives remain satisfying all user-deﬁned constraints and
maximizing the number of valid regions p. This design allows
for more expressive and realistic regionalization outcomes.
IV . N
P-HARDNESS OF IMS
This section proves the NP-hardness of the IMS problem.
The NP-hardness of the IMS problem follows the results that
the MP-regions problem is NP-hard [10], [54], [55].T h eM P -
regions problem takes as input: (1) a set of spatially contiguous
areas A = {a
1,a 2,...,a n}. Each area ai is associated with an
identiﬁer i, a spatial polygon bi, a spatially extensive attribute
si and a dissimilarity attribute di, (2) a threshold value t.F o r
the purpose of the proof, we solve both the MP-regions and the
IMS problem as decision problems with a ﬁxed p = k.
Theorem 1. The IMS problem is NP-hard.
Proof. Let X = (A,t ) be an instance of the MP-regions prob-
lem. We construct an instance Y= (A
′,C ) of the IMS problem as
follows: (1) For each area ai ∈X.A, add to Y.A′ an area a′
i =
{i,b i,S′
i,d i}, S′
i = {si}.( 2 )L e t C = {(SUM,S ′[0],t, ∞)}.
(3) Let the number of regions p equal k. This reduction is of
polynomial time of O(n) where n is the number of areas in
A. Therefore, an algorithm that decides on the instance Y of
the IMS problem decides on the instance X of the MP-regions
problem as well. As the MP-regions problem is NP-hard, then
the IMS problem is NP-hard, and the proof is complete. □
V. P
ROPOSED SOLUTION
This section presents FaCT, a three-phase algorithm for solv-
ing IMS with low heterogeneity. The ﬁrst phase is a feasibility
phase that checks feasibility under user-deﬁned constraints.
The second phase is a construction phase that builds an initial
solution maximizing p while satisfying all constraints. This is
the algorithm’s core contribution. It balances two challenging
objectives: satisfying multiple non-monotonic constraints and
maximizing spatially contiguous regions. The third phase is a
local search phase that improves the initial solution of the
construction phase in terms of the heterogeneity score. Fig. 2
illustrates the FaCT algorithm’s three-phase workﬂow, depicting
the ﬂow of data from the initial user inputs to the ﬁnal optimized
region set. The following sections detail each phase.
A. Feasibility Phase
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
384 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 2. FaCT framework.
The IMS problem handles arbitrary combinations of attribute
constraints. The feasibility phase alerts users early to: (1) the in-
feasibility of ﬁnding a solution for the given set of constraints on
the given dataset, and (2) the possibility of removing some areas
to satisfy the given constraints. The fact that our algorithm can
detect and ﬁlter out infeasible areas for all constraints, including
non-monotonic constraints, gives it major practical advantages
when employing multiple constraints. It not only alerts users to
infeasibility but also automatically removes problematic areas,
enabling ﬂexible analysis across diverse datasets and constraint
conﬁgurations.
Given a set of user-deﬁned constraints C =
{(MIN,s
min,l min,u min), (MAX,s max,l max,u max),
(AVG,s avg,l avg,u avg ), (VAR,s var,l var,u var ),
(SUM,s sum,l sum,u sum), (COUNT,s count,l count,u count)},
we check the feasibility of applying each type of constraint as
follows:
(1) For A VG constraints, we compute the average value
AV G (savg ) of attributesavg over all areas. IfAVG (savg ) <l avg
or AVG (savg ) >u avg , we infer that there exists no partition
where all regions satisfy the A VG constraint without removing
any area. This is justiﬁed by Theorem 3 below.
Theorem 2. If ∃P = {R
1,R 2,...,R p} so that every region
Ri ∈P satisﬁes c =( AVG,s avg,l avg,u avg ) and P contains
all areas in a set A, then the average value AVG (savg ) of savg
over all areas of A satisﬁes c, i.e., lavg ≤AVG (savg ) ≤uavg .
Proof. If p =1 ,i.e.,P = {A}, the proposition is trivially
true. If p> 1, as all regions in P satisfy c,w eh a v e :
lavg ≤Ri.AVG (savg ) ≤uavg,∀i, 1 ≤i ≤p (2)
where Ri.AVG (savg ) represents the average value of attribute
savg over areas in regionRi.L e t|Ri| denote the number of areas
in region Ri.A s P contains all areas, we have:
p∑
i=1
|Ri| = n (3)
Also, by deﬁnition:
AVG (savg )×n =
p∑
i=1
(|Ri|× Ri.AVG ) (4)
AVG (savg )=
∑p
i=1(|Ri|× Ri.AVG )
n
≤
∑p
i=1 |Ri|uavg
n ˜=˜ uavg (5)
AVG (savg )=
∑p
i=1(|Ri|× Ri.AVG )
n
≥
∑p
i=1 |Ri|lavg
n ˜=˜ lavg (6)
Equations (5) and (6)⇒ lavg ≤AVG (savg ) ≤uavg .
Hence, the Theorem 2 is true, and the proof is complete. □
Theorem 3. For an area set A and an A VG constraint
c =( AVG,s avg,l avg,u avg ), if the average value of savg over
A, AVG (savg ), does not satisfy c, i.e., AVG (savg ) <l avg or
AVG (savg ) >u avg , then ∄P = {R1,R 2,...,R p} such that P
partitions all areas in A andRi ∈P satisﬁesc, ∀1 ≤i ≤p.
Theorem 3 is proved by proving its contrapositive Theorem2.
(2) For MIN constraints , we compute the minimum and
maximum values over all areas for attribute smin,MIN (smin)
andMAX (smin), respectively. Two different cases could cause
infeasibility: (a) If MAX (smin) <l min or MIN (smin) >
umin, then no area satisﬁes the MIN constraint and no valid
regions can be constructed, so there is no feasible solution. (b) If
MIN (s
min) <l min <MA X(smin), all areas with smin <
lmin are infeasible areas that cannot be part of any valid region,
so they must be ﬁltered out to build a feasible solution. Therefore,
there is room to ﬁnd a feasible solution after removing infeasible
areas.
(3) Similarly for MAX constraints , there are two cases of
infeasibility: (a) If MIN (s
max) >u max or MAX (smax) <
lmax, no area that satisﬁes the MAX constraint, and there is no
feasible solution. (b) Areas with smax >u max are infeasible
areas that must be ﬁltered out to ﬁnd a solution.
(4) For SUM constraints , we compute the minimum
and summation of all areas for ssum, MIN (ssum) and
SUM (ssum), respectively. There are three cases of infeasibility:
(a) If MIN (ssum) >u sum, no region can have ssum within
the range. (b) If SUM (ssum) <l sum, even the trivial region
containing all areas cannot havessum within the range. (c) Areas
with ssum >u sum are infeasible and must be removed.
(5) For COUNT constraints , if the number of areas n<
lcount, there is no feasible solution as a region containing all
areas cannot meet the lower bound lcount.
The feasibility phase iterates through the area set and com-
putes the needed attribute aggregates for all constraints in a
single pass. This pass is enough to ﬁlter out infeasible areas, that
have s
min <l min, smax >u max,o r ssum >u sum, to elimi-
nate potential infeasible regions. However, the feasibility pass
is not enough to ﬁlter out infeasible areas for the A VG constraint.
This is performed during the following construction phase while
imposing A VG constraints. In addition, the feasibility does not
check for the V AR constraint due to its special mathematical
property. Instead, V AR is closely tracked and efﬁciently updated
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 385
Fig. 3. Step 1: Filtering and seeding.
as we prove in Section V- B. However, feasibility would check
if A VG and V AR are speciﬁed together and signal the user that
this would cause a high probability of failure because these two
strict constraints tend to cause infeasible results when used at
the same time. All infeasible areas are ﬁltered out fromA, added
to the setU
0, and they are not considered in any further process-
ing. The remaining areas in set A are passed to the following
phases.
B. Construction Phase
The construction phase heuristically constructs a feasible
solution that: (a) satisﬁes all user-deﬁned constraints, (b) maxi-
mizes the number of regionsp. This phase faces the challenges of
simultaneously satisfying multiple non-monotonic constraints
while avoiding oversized regions that reducep. To address these
challenges, each constraint family is handled in a separate step.
This design offers several beneﬁts. First, each step focuses on
one type of optimization, simplifying the problem. Second, this
step-wise design ﬂexibly handles arbitrary constraint subsets (as
discussed in Section V- D). Third, the order of steps makes use of
the mathematical properties of different aggregate functions to
increase the probability of producing a feasible solution. It ﬁrst
ﬁlters areas using MIN/MAX/SUM to seed regions, then applies
A VG or V AR to grow them, and ﬁnally adjusts SUM/COUNT as
needed. Fourth, separated steps facilitate maximizing the value
of p, as detailed later, without violating previously satisﬁed
constraints. Consequently, our construction phase produces an
initial partition with near-optimal p for heterogeneity reﬁne-
ment. Fifth, the independence of each step enables incremental
updates, reusing unaffected results to reduce computation (as
discussed in Section VII). Although reducing the overall het-
erogeneity score is an objective for the ﬁnal solution, this phase
does not optimize heterogeneity, which is handled later.
The construction phase runs multiple iterations. Each iteration
produces a feasible partition, and we maintain the partition with
the highestp value. Each iteration is divided into three steps. The
ﬁrst step handles extrema (MIN, MAX), the second step handles
centrality (A VG, V AR), and the third step handles counting
(SUM, COUNT). Each step is detailed below. Fig.3(a) provides
a running example for illustration. For simplicity and without
loss of generality, all constraints are assumed to apply to the
same attribute s.
Step 1: Filtering and Seeding: This step handles extrema
constraints, i.e., MIN and MAX constraints. They serve two
purposes: (a) ﬁltering out the infeasible areas, and (b) spec-
ifying the set of seed areas . Infeasible areas are already ex-
cluded during the feasibility phase (Section V- A). Seed areas
are those meeting the bounds of any MIN or MAX constraint.
For instance, for two constraints c
1 =( MIN,s 1,l 1,u 1) and
c2 =( MAX,s 2,l 2,u 2), any area with l1 ≤s1 ≤u1 or l2 ≤
s2 ≤u2 is a valid seed area. This generalizes to any number of
MIN/MAX constraints.
This step provides three levels of optimization through choos-
ing a seed area that satisﬁes the bounds of only one con-
straint. First, it identiﬁes seeds for any arbitrary combination
of MIN/MAX constraints. When constraints span different at-
tributes or have disjoint ranges, no area satisﬁes all. Handling
constraints independently increase seed ﬂexibility. Second, the
number of seed areas is an upper bound for the number of
regionsp as each feasible region must contain at least one seed
area for each constraint. Maximizing seed usage helps grow
more regions and increasesp. Third, it enables piggybacking the
seed areas selection on the infeasible areas ﬁltration during the
feasibility phase: The algorithm simultaneously checks seeding
conditions and marks valid seeds.
Example: Fig. 3(b) illustrates the result of Step 1 for the
example area set in Fig. 3(a). The extrema constraints are set
as {(MIN,s, 2, 4), (MAX,s, 6, 7)}. Areas a
1, a8, and a9 are
moved to set U0 because their attribute values are below 2
or above 7. The remaining areas after ﬁltering are shown in
Fig. 3(b).A r e aa2, a3, and a4 are selected as seed areas for the
MIN constraint and areaa6 anda7 are selected as seed areas for
the MAX constraint, as shown in Fig. 3(b).
Complexity analysis. All operations of the feasibility phase
and Step 1 of the construction phase are performed in one pass
over the n areas. Each area is validated against all MIN, MAX,
and SUM constraints to be classiﬁed as either infeasible, valid,
or seed area. The time complexity is O(m×n), wherem is the
number of constraints and typically m< <n.
Remark 1. The time complexity of the feasibility phase and
the Filtering and Seeding is O(m×n).
Step 2: Region Growing: The second step grows regions
that satisfy the A VG constraint c =( AVG,s,l,u ) or the V AR
constraintc =( VAR,s,l,u ), without violating the MIN/MAX
constraints. This step is divided into three substeps for each
constraint. The ﬁrst substep initializes a set of regions. The
second substep assigns the unassigned areas to the regions. The
third substep combines regions to ensure each region satisﬁes
all constraints. We ﬁrst detail each substep for A VG in Substep
2.1 A to 2.3 A and then for V AR in Substep 2.1 V to 2.3 V below.
Substep 2.1 A utilizes the set of seed areas, called seeds,
from Step 1 to initialize regions. Areas in seeds satisfy at
least one MIN/MAX constraint and must be part of a valid
region. The algorithm iterates over seeds and classiﬁes all seed
areas into three subsets based on their A VG attribute value s:
unassigned_avg, unassigned_low, and unassigned_high.
unassigned_avg contains areas that satisfy the condition
l ≤s ≤u. unassigned_low contains seed areas that satisfy
s<l , i.e., s value is lower than c’s lower bound. Similarly,
unassigned_high contains seed areas with s>u . Only areas
inunassigned_avg satisfyc and are used in region initialization
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
386 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Algorithm 1: Region Growing - Merging Areas.
directly. As we want to maximize the number of output regionsp,
we make each area inunassigned_avg a separate region, and all
new regions are added to a region list P . Then, we merge areas
in unassigned_low and unassigned_high with their spatial
neighbors to compose regions that satisfy c. Algorithm 1 gives
the merging procedure.
Algorithm 1 initiates each unassigned area as a temporary
regionR ( L i n e s4t o6 ) .W h i l eR does not satisfy the constraint
c’s bounds, the algorithm tries to add a neighbor area an that
moves R’s overall average of attribute s towards c’s range
(Lines 16 to 21). Once R satisﬁesc, it is added to the region list
P (Lines 10 to 12). If R’s neighbors are exhausted and cannot
form a valid region, the whole procedure is reverted, and areas
of R remain unassigned.
Substep 2.2 A assigns remaining unassigned areas, includ-
ing seeds and regular areas. Similar to classifying seeds ar-
eas in Substep 2.1, all areas that are not in seeds set are
added to either unassigned_avg set, unassigned_low set,
or unassigned_high set, depending on their s value. There
are two rounds for assigning the remaining unassigned areas.
In the ﬁrst round, we try to add the unassigned areas to their
neighbor regions. All areas in unassigned_avg can be safely
added to any of its neighbor regions as it is guaranteed not to
introduce a violation ofc. For each area inunassigned_low and
Fig. 4. Step 2: Region Growing - Substep 2.1 & 2.2-Round 1.
unassigned_high, we must check if adding it to the neighbor
region violatesc. The second round attempts to assign the areas
inunassigned_high andunassigned_low through controlled
region merging. A merge limit parameter caps the number of
merging attempts, preventing oversized regions and keeping
runtime manageable, allowing users to balance between maxi-
mizing the number of regions and improving partition feasibility.
Given an unassigned area a, the algorithm tries to merge one of
a’s neighboring regionsR andR’s neighbors witha and checks
ifc is satisﬁed for the newly merged region. If the merge limit is
set to 0, the step is skipped; otherwise, the algorithm performs
merging attempts up to the allowed limit. Substep 2.3 A merges
neighboring regions to satisfy all MIN/MAX constraints. Since
each area inseeds satisﬁes only one MIN or MAX constraint, its
region inherits that single satisfaction. The algorithm scans the
region list P and merges non-satisfying regions with neighbors
that satisfy other constraints. This step preserves A VG constraint
c since merging compliant regions keeps c valid. Thus, after
Step 2, all regions inP satisfy MIN, MAX, and A VG constraints.
However, if no suitable neighbor region exists, the region is
discarded, and its areas are added to the unassigned set U
0.T h i s
aligns with IMS, which permits unassigned areas under strict or
conﬂicting constraints.
Example: Fig. 4 shows an example of Substep 2.1 and Sub-
step 2.2. Given c =( AVG,s, 4, 5), in Substep 2.1, only seed
area a4 is added to unassigned_avg and initialized as a new
regionRred (Fig. 4(a)).a2 anda3 are added tounassigned_low
and a6 and a7 are added to unassigned_high. The average of
a2.s2 and a6.s6 is 4, and they are combined to form the region
Rblue. Similarly,a3 anda7 form the regionRgreen with average
value 5. So, Substep 2.2 initializes three regions as depicted in
Fig. 4(a). Then, in Substep 2.2, the remaining unassigned areaa
5
is assigned to its neighbor region Rblue as depicted in Fig. 4(b).
Example: Fig. 5 provides an example for Round 2 of Sub-
step 2.2 with merge limit = 1. In contrast to the example in
Fig. 4, the unassigned area a2 cannot be added to its neighbor
regionRblue = {a3,a 6} directly. Addinga2 toRblue generates a
region with an averages value equals 3.67, which is smaller than
4 and violates the constraint c =( AVG,s, 4, 5). Because the
merge limit allows one attempt, the algorithm attempts to merge
Rblue = {a3,a 6} with its neighbor region Rgreen = {a4,a 5},
forming a temporary region Rred = {a3,a 4,a 5,a 6},a ss h o w n
in Fig. 5(b).Rred acceptsa2 and the average value is 4.4, which
satisﬁes the constraint c.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 387
Fig. 5. Step 2: Region Growing - Substep 2.2 - Round 2.
Fig. 6. Step 2: Region Growing - Substep 2.3.
Example: Fig. 6 gives an example of Substep 2.3 for the
example region partition in Fig. 4(b). Rred = {a4} contains
only the MIN seed area; hence it does not satisfy the MAX
constraint. Because both neighbor regionsR
blue = {a2,a 5,a 6}
and Rgreen = {a3,a 7} satisfy the MAX constraint, Rred can
be combined with either region to form a region satisfying
all constraints. The results are depicted in Fig. 6(a) and (b),
respectively.
V AR constraint computation follows the same three-step
structure as A VG. Though both are nonmonotonic, they differ
in one key aspect. The V AR constraint speciﬁcally manages the
dispersion of regions. Thus, verifying compliance after adding or
merging areas requires speciﬁc calculations. To support this, we
introduce two equations for efﬁciently updating region variance
and evaluating area or region mergers. For each region, we
continuously update two sums: the sum of variance attribute
values ∑s, and the sum of the squares of these values ∑s
2.
The symbol ∑ here aggregates the values for all areas within a
given region. The region’s variance can be computed as:
VAR (Ri)=
∑(sj −¯s)2
|Ri|
=
∑(s2
j −2¯ssj +¯s2)
|Ri|
=
∑s2
|Ri| − 2¯s ∑s
|Ri| + |Ri|¯s2
|Ri|
=
∑s2
|Ri| −2¯s2 +¯s2
=
∑s2
|Ri| −(
∑s
|Ri| )2 (7)
By leveraging (7), we can deduce the potential change in a
region’s variance attribute value upon the addition of an area
by simply adjusting ∑s and ∑s2. Furthermore, this allows
us to identify the permissible range of variance attribute values
for areas that can be added to the region. If x symbolizes the
variance attribute value of a potential area, the variance post its
addition is represented as VAR (R
′
i), where |R′
i| = |Ri| +1 .
VAR (R′
i)=
∑s2 +x2
|Ri| +1 −(
∑s +x
|Ri| +1 )2
=
∑s2 +x2 − (∑ s+x)2
|Ri|+1
|Ri| +1
=
|Ri|x2
|Ri|+1 − 2 ∑ s
|Ri|+1 + ∑s2 − (∑ s)2
|Ri|+1
|Ri| +1 (8)
To make sure the new region satisﬁes the VAR constraint,
we have:
l ≤VAR (R′
i) ≤u (9)
Using (9), we can swiftly determine and store the acceptable
variance attribute value range for each region by ﬁnding the roots
of the quadratic equations VAR (R′
i)= l andVAR (R′
i)= u.
We then delve into three substeps for area veriﬁcation and
assignment: Similar to Substep 2.1 A, Substep 2.1 V uses seeds
to initialize potential regions. If l ≤0, each seed forms its own
region, since a single area has zero variance. If l> 0, seed
areas are iteratively merged with neighbors to adjust regional
variance toward [l,r ]. During this addition, preference is given
to seed areas that satisfy a constraint that the current temporary
region fails to meet. In all other instances, non-seed areas
are prioritized to maintain the number of potential regions.
The algorithm continues expanding region R until it satisﬁes
constraint c. Following this, R is added to the region list P .
Should the neighbors of R be insufﬁcient to form a valid re-
gion, the entire operation is reversed, leaving the areas of R
unassigned.
Substeps 2.2 V and 2.3 V mirror the procedures of Sub-
steps 2.2 A and 2.3 A respectively. In 2.2 V , unassigned areas
are added to neighboring regions if their V AR values fall within
the region’s acceptable range. In 2.3 V , regions lacking seeds
for all constraints are merged with neighbors. Since merging
two VAR -compliant regions may still violate the constraint
due to differing means, a merge limit is imposed. This allows
multiple merging attempts (per(7)) to reach feasibility. A similar
heuristic is used when area reallocation or merging violates
VAR . If infeasible regions remain, they are removed and their
areas gradually reassigned to neighbors based on the acceptable
range deﬁned in (9).
Complexity analysis. The approach to compute AVG and
VAR shares procedural similarities, and any single query can
accommodate only one constraint at a time. Since their differ-
ing validation steps take constant time, both constraints have
the same complexity. We thus analyze the complexity of the
three main substeps generally. Consequently, we refer to Sub-
step 2.1 A and Substep 2.1 V collectively as Substep 2.1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
388 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
The same consolidation applies to Substeps 2.2 and 2.3. The
Substep 2.1 and the ﬁrst round of the Substep 2.2 iterate through
all seed areas and each takes O(n) time. The second round
of 2.2 iterates over unassigned areas, removing at least one
per iteration or terminating early. The number of unassigned
areas is ≤n, hence the worst-case total number of operations
is ∑
n
i=1 i = O(n2). Merges are bounded in number, and each
takes constant time. Substep 2.3 iterates through all regions
once, thus taking maximum of O(n) time. Thus, Step 2 time
complexity is O(n)+ O(n)+ O(n2)+ O(n)= O(n2).
Remark 2. The time complexity of Region Growing is O(n2).
Step 3: Monotonic Adjustments: Step 3 enforces SUM and
COUNT constraints while preserving previously satisﬁed ones.
This step builds on MP-regions algorithms [56] Since regions
are ﬁrst constructed for MIN, MAX, A VG, or V AR, further
adjustments at both area and region levels are required. As
SUM and COUNT are monotonic, areas can be added or re-
moved to bring regions within bounds. For each violating region,
we ﬁrst attempt area swaps with neighbors without breaking
other constraints. Spatial contiguity is preserved by checking
the donor region remains connected after swaps. If swapping
fails, regions below bounds are merged, or areas are removed
from those above bounds. Finally, if no further changes are
possible, infeasible regions are removed and the partition is
ﬁnalized.
Example: With the input shown in Fig. 6(a) and
the example constraints c
4 =( SUM,s, 12,∞) and c5 =
(COUNT,s, −∞, 4), the region Rgreen = {a3,a 7} does not
satisfyc4. The boundary area with the neighbor region Rblue =
{a1,a 4,a 5,a 6} isa4.A r e aa4 is swapped fromRblue toRgreen
after ensuring that both regions still satisfy all the other con-
straints, and Rblue is spatially continuous and still above the
lower bound of c4. The result is depicted in Fig. 6(b).A f t e r
swapping, the receiver region Rgreen = {a4,a 5,a 7} satisﬁes
all the constraints, so the swapping attempts are terminated.
Complexity analysis. Each area is swapped at most once, as
it remains valid in the feasible region post-swap. Each swap
updates attributes of both donor and receiver regions in O(m)
time. Checking donor region connectivity is O(n) in the worst
case. As a result, the time complexity of swapping is O((2m +
n)×n)= O(n2). The area removal of regions that exceed the
upper bounds and removing infeasible regions takes one O(n)
pass each. Thus, the overall time complexity isO(n2)+ O(n)+
O(n)= O(n2).
Remark 3. The time complexity of Monotonic Adjustments is
O(n2).
C. Local Search Phase
The partition with the largest number of regions p is passed
to the local search to reduce heterogeneity. This phase employs
Tabu search [24], a meta-heuristic, to minimize heterogeneity.
This aligns with the two-phase regionalization design[10], [48],
which separates construction and reﬁnement for better tractabil-
ity and quality. In brief, Tabu search iteratively moves areas
between neighboring regions while preserving all constraints. It
starts from the feasible partition from construction and explores
the best neighboring solution. Worse solution may be accepted
to escape local optima. Moves are recorded in a tabu list with
ﬁxed tenure to prevent cycling. When a move leads to a partition
better than the best partition so far, the algorithm chooses this
move even if the tabu list prohibits it. The search ends after a
ﬁxed number of steps without improvement, returning the best
partition. This phase preserves the number of regions p while
improving heterogeneity.
Complexity analysis. As an incomplete algorithm, Tabu
search’s complexity is approximated based on its parameters
and neighborhood computation. It allows up ton non-improving
steps per cycle, resetting on improvement, resulting in a worst-
case of O(αn) iterations, where αis the number of improving
moves. Each iteration updates valid moves via region con-
nectivity checks on boundary areas, costing O(n×n) times.
A move attempt takes O(n) to compute the pair-wise dis-
similarity in the worst case. So, the overall time complexity
is O(αn× (n
2 +n)) = O(αn3). In practice, most improving
moves occur early, so the actual number of iterations is often
much less than 2n.
Remark 4. The time complexity of the Local Search phase is
O(αn3), whereαis the number of valid moves that improve the
heterogeneity over the existing optimum.
D. Handling Arbitrary Sets of Constraints
While previous discussion assumes all constraint types,
queries often contain only a subset. For example, a query could
have only one A VG constraint, or one MIN constraint and one
COUNT constraint. This section outlines how FaCT handles
such arbitrary subset. FaCT treats missing constraints as hav-
ing an inﬁnite range (−∞,∞), impacting both feasibility and
construction. Without MIN/MAX, feasibility skips ﬁltering, and
Step 1 selects all areas as seed areas. If the A VG constraint is
missing, the Region Growing step adds all areas in seeds to
unassigned_avg and then initializes single-area regions. Areas
not in seeds are then added to unassigned_avg and merged to
neighbor regions iteratively. If SUM/COUNT constraints are
absent, Step 3 of the construction phase is omitted. Thus,FaCT’s
modular design enables ﬂexible handling of any constraint sub-
set.
VI. C
OMPLEXITY ANAL YSIS
This section analyzes FaCT’s time and space complexity.
According to Remarks 1, 2, and 3 in Section V- B, the time com-
plexity of the feasibility and the three steps of the construction
phases areO(n),O(n
2), andO(n2), respectively. Thus, the total
time complexity of both phases isO(n2). According to Remark4
in Section V- C, the time complexity of the Local Search phase
isO(αn3). Therefore, FaCT’s total worst-case time complexity
isO(αn3), where αis the number of improving moves in local
search. For space, storing n areas with m attributes (from m
constraints) takes O(m×n) space. Seed selection adds O(n),
and region growing holds temporary regions of up toO(n) areas.
Each initialized region maintainsm attributes and its areas. The
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 389
regions are disjoint, so the space taken by the region list is
bounded by O(m×n). The Monotonic Adjustments step and
the Local Search phase updates the region list in place and does
not require additional space. Thus, the overall space complexity
isO(m×n).
VII. I
NCREMENTAL UPDA TE ANDREUSE OF RESULTS
Incremental updates are widely used in databases and real-
time systems. Adding incremental updates to FaCT improves
scalability and supports interactive exploration, especially with
large datasets or tight constraints. As discussed in Section I,
deﬁning region scale is a key challenge, motivating the shift-
ing from p-regions to MP-regions. With more complex IMS
constraints, adjusting scale becomes signiﬁcantly slower. As
datasets grow, even efﬁcient O(n) steps like ﬁltering and seed-
ing become costly. However, FaCT’s heuristic and selection
schemes yield high-quality results per constraint, provided that
the constraint remains unchanged. We categorize updates into
two types and handle them with different strategies:
Local Incremental Update: Local incremental updates ad-
dress changes in small region subsets. Typical examples include
administrative boundary changes, such as county mergers or
splits. In terms of the IMS formulation, there can be a dramatic
change in the population of certain areas, which will render
the current partitioning obsolete. However, such changes are
typically local and conﬁned to neighboring areas. Inspired by
the Iterated Greedy algorithm [57], we adopt a deconstruction-
reconstruction strategy. To be more speciﬁc, the incremental
update for local changes is divided into three steps: (1) Identify
affected regions and their one-hop neighbors to form connected
components. (2) Deconstruct these components while leaving
other regions unchanged. (3) Reconstruct and merge updated
regions with the unchanged partition. This step includes reas-
signing leftover areas and validating the region list. The partition
statistics are reported to inform users if drastic changes affect
update quality. As demonstrated in Section VI, the time com-
plexity of the FaCT algorithm stands at O(αn
3). Consequently,
FaCT’s performance is markedly enhanced when the problem
size is reduced by the local incremental update.
Global Incremental Update : This relates to signiﬁcant alter-
ations to one or multiple constraints. These include adjusting
thresholds or switching constraint attributes, impacting all re-
gions. Because of FaCT’s modular design, intermediate results
can be reused when only part of the constraints or attribute
values change. For example, if constraints include MIN, A VG,
and SUM, users may later adjust SUM’s threshold or attribute
(e.g., from total to employed population). Step 2 results can
be reused in such cases. Since A VG computations are often a
bottleneck, incremental updates can signiﬁcantly reduce com-
putation, especially in online settings. FaCT supports global
updates via three steps: (1) Identify changed constraints by
hashing their deﬁnitions and attribute lists. (2) The results that
can be reused are determined by the unchanged constraints. (3)
The partition is incrementally updated by only recomputing the
required constraints. The performance comparisons with full
recomputation are provided in Section IX-G.
Algorithm 2: Iterated Greedy Framework.
VIII. I TERA TEDGREEDY
As discussed in the previous section, local incremental up-
dates use deconstruction and reconstruction inspired by the
Iterated Greedy (IG) algorithm. IG offers strong performance
despite its simplicity and is widely used in many domains [57],
[58], [59], [60]. In this section, we further extend this idea and
explore the potential of utilizing IG to improve the result quality.
Algorithm 2 gives a high-level overview of the IG frame-
work with FaCT construction ( FaCT-IG) for addressing the
IMS problem. FaCT-IGstarts with an initial solution, which we
obtain through the construction phase as detailed in Section V- B
(line 1). Then it goes through iterations of partial deconstructions
(line 3) and reconstructions (line 4).
Deconstruction: The deconstruction phase deconstructs the
feasible solution P
∗according to the disturbance intensity D.
D ∈[0, 1] determines to what extent the algorithm partially
deconstructs theP∗. In the IMS problem, we choose⌈D ∗|P∗|⌉
regions for deconstruction. We iteratively select areas at random
and include their regions and one-hop neighbors in a candidate
set, reinforcing the greedy criterion. This procedure repeats until
the candidate set contains at least ⌈D ∗|P
∗|⌉ regions. Larger
regions are more likely to be selected, preserving randomness
while favoring size. In return, a larger number of areas provide
higher ﬂexibility in reconstructing more regions. Regions in the
candidate set and their one-hop neighbors are then deconstructed
with their areas returned to set A
dec, and the unchanged regions
a r es t o r e di nPdec.
Reconstruction and acceptance criteria: Like the local incre-
mental update (SectionVII), the reconstruction phase applies the
greedy construction (SectionV- B)t oAdec. The resulting regions
are merged withPdec to formPrec . To align with the MP-regions
strategy, the new result is accepted only if it improves over the
current solution. Line 5 compares|P
rec| and|P∗|, i.e. thep value
of the partition after reconstruction and the existing best solution.
If |Prec| > |P∗|, Prec becomes the new initial solution for the
following iterations. It is worth noting that there are multiple
ways to deﬁne the termination condition (Line 2) and the accep-
tance criteria (Line 5). For example, we can adapt the simulated
annealing algorithm to allow the algorithm to tolerate worse
results at a certain probability and terminate when the iteration
converges.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
390 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF THE MULTI-STATE DA TASETS
FaCT-IGis a metaheuristic search algorithm, and we build it
upon the FaCT heuristic algorithm. As a result, its runtime is not
strictly comparable with theFaCTalgorithm and the MP-regions
problem due to the difference in framework and the additional
parameter tuning procedures. To be fair, we stop FaCT-IGif no
p improvement occurs for 20 iterations or if it reaches the same
iteration limit as MP-regions. Experimental evaluations of the
efﬁciency and the effectiveness of the FaCT-IG algorithm are
given in Section IX-H.
IX. E XPERIMENT EVA L U AT I O N
This section presents an extensive experimental evaluation
of our proposed work to address the IMS problem. The code
and data for reproducing the results presented in this section are
publicly available [61]. The rest of the section introduces the
experimental setup (Section IX-A), studies the impact of dif-
ferent constraint types and threshold ranges on the performance
(Section IX-D), shows the scalability of the FaCT algorithm
(Section IX-F), and summarizes the experimental results (Sec-
tion IX-I).
A. Experimental Setup
IMS is a novel problem with no direct competitor. Due to the
enriched formulation, MP-regions techniques cannot be directly
extended to IMS. We evaluate the performance of our method.
We also study the impact of different combinations of enriched
constraints.
Evaluation datasets: We use nine real datasets that represent
the census tracts of the USA, outlined as follows: (1) the Los
Angeles City (denoted as 1 k) which includes 1012 areas, (2) the
Los Angeles County (denoted as 2 k) which includes 2344 areas,
(3) Southern California (denoted as 4 k) as identiﬁed by the
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) [62]
that includes 3947 areas, (4) the State of California (denoted
as 8 k) which includes 8049 areas, and (5) Five multi-state
datasets with ∼ 10k to ∼ 50k areas, as detailed in Table I.
Our default dataset is 2 k. Typical evaluation datasets in the
existing literature have between 300-3000 areas [10], [56],s o
our default dataset size is comparable to the largest datasets
in the literature. All datasets are joined with real attributes
from the 2010 US census data about facts in each census tract.
All datasets share the same three spatial extensive attributes as
shown in Table II, one per constraint type, and the dissimilarity
attribute is HOUSEHOLDS. POP16UP: population age ≥16;
EMPLOYED: employed population; TOTALPOP: total popula-
tion. HOUSEHOLDS: household count (used for heterogeneity).
TABLE II
DEFAULTATTRIBUTES AND RANGES FOR DIFFERENT CONSTRAINTS
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF METHODS ON THE LA_COUNTY DATA S E T
The evaluation attributes are selected based on factors that
inﬂuence the population growth rate [13], which makes the
partitions obtained through the experiments useful for studying
population growth. The shapeﬁles of the census tracts and the
attribute tables are provided by the US Census Bureau [63] and
SCAG [64] and joined using the QGIS software [65].
Experiments run on Java 14 with Intel Xeon W-2123
(3.60 GHz) and 20 GB RAM on Windows 10. Performance
is measured by construction and search runtime, result size p,
and heterogeneity improvement, deﬁned as the relative reduc-
tion in heterogeneity after local search. Our parameters include
threshold range and dataset size. Unless mentioned otherwise,
the default settings are: dataset = 2 k, random area selection,
A VG merge limit= 3, Tabu list length = 10, and Tabu stopping
= dataset size. The default threshold ranges and attributes are
shown in Table II for each constraint type. Due to space and
similar trends, we report one aggregate per constraint type.
B. FaCT Effectiveness
We ﬁrst assess the effectiveness of FaCT by comparing it
against two heuristic baseline methods that represent common
strategies for spatially constrained partitioning:
r GreedyPartition: This method follows the region-
growing strategy from the MP-regions algorithm [10].
After ﬁltering and seeding, it starts from seed areas and
greedily adds adjacent areas until all constraints are satis-
ﬁed.
r RandomPartition: This method randomly selects areas
ﬁltering and assigns the rest in a constraint-aware manner.
If the result is infeasible, it retries.
To better distinguish our method from the baseline, we retain
the default constraint settings and tighten the A VG constraint
from [1.5k, 3.5k] to [2k, 4k], informed by the attribute distri-
bution of the 2k dataset. As shown in Table III, FaCT outper-
forms both baselines, producing 44 valid regions with only 161
unassigned areas in 5.366ms. In contrast, GreedyPartition and
RandomPartition yield only 2 and 1 regions, with thousands
of unassigned areas. GreedyPartition often stalls with small or
fragmented regions, while RandomPartition is fast but typically
yields poor-quality results. FaCT’s constraint-aware design en-
sures both high quality and efﬁciency in generating spatially
coherent partitions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 391
Fig. 7. p and number of unassigned areas with varying merge limit.
Fig. 8. Construction time and Tabu search time with varying merge limit.
Fig. 9. Impact of Tabu Tenure on Heterogeneity Score improvement and Tabu
search time under two constraint settings.
C. Parameter Tuning
This section examines how key parameters affect solution
quality, efﬁciency, and unassigned areas.
1) Merge Limit: This parameter constrains the number of
merges in the A VG step. Fig.7 shows thep value and number of
unassigned areas (UA), and Fig. 8 shows the construction time
(C) and Tabu search time (T) for two threshold ranges: 3k ± 1k
and 3k ± 0.5k. Larger merge limits reduce p and increase con-
struction time. These two measures trade off with the number
of unassigned areas. For 3k ± 0.5k,p improves until the merge
limit 3, then declines (Fig. 7(b)). For wider ranges, UA drops
until the merge limit 3-5, then rises (Fig. 7(a)). Tabu runtime
shows no clear trend, but often grows with the merge limit. For
wider thresholds, UA is always low and the merge limit has little
effect. Thus, merge limits 2-3 yield minimal UA with goodp and
runtime, while larger limits sharply increase construction cost.
2) Tabu Tenure: We evaluate how Tabu Tenure affects H
Score and search time under two constraint settings (Fig. 9).
HSI represents Heterogeneity Score Improvement, while TST
Fig. 10. Runtime for MIN with l = ∞.
denotes Tabu Search Time. Tabu Tenure deﬁnes how long a
move is banned to avoid cycling.
In Constraint 1 (MIN+A VG), increasing tenure from 1 to 2
boosts H Score and slightly reduces TST (Fig. 9(a)). Further
increases yield diminishing returns. In Constraint 2 (SUM only),
H Score peaks at tenure 2 and stays stable (Fig. 9(b)). These
results suggest that a small tenure value is sufﬁcient to enhance
solution quality without incurring excessive search time, as the
solution space is limited due to the constraints imposed.
D. Impact of Constraints Types
This section studies the impact of different sets of constraints
on regionalization performance. Sets of constraints vary in
terms of: (1) set size, i.e., number of constraints, (2) types of
constraints, and (3) threshold ranges. Sections IX-D1, IX-D2
and IX-D4 evaluate sets that include MIN, A VG, and SUM
constraints, respectively. MIN constraints are denoted as M,
combinations of MIN and A VG constraints are denoted as MA,
combinations of MIN and SUM constraints are denoted as MS,
combinations of MIN, A VG, and SUM constraints are denoted
as MAS. Time of local search is denoted as Tabu.
1) MIN Constraint: This section evaluates regionalization
queries with MIN constraints, c =( MIN,s,l,u ), in combi-
nation with other constraint types. MIN and MAX constraints
perform two roles: ﬁltering infeasible areas and selecting seed
areas, and both depend on the range threshold [l,u ]. Hence, we
explore three cases: (a) ranges with l = −∞, which shows the
impact ofu values on seed area selection, (b) ranges withu = ∞,
which shows the impact of l values on infeasible area ﬁltration,
and (c) ranges with bounded values of l and u that show their
simultaneous impact.
Fig. 10 shows that runtime varies by constraint type. TableIV
gives the number of regions p for different constraint combi-
nations. Using only the MIN constraint yields the highest p,
bounded by the number of seed areas. Larger u yields more
seeds, fewer iterations, and lower runtime (Fig. 10). Adding
constraints leads to fewer regions, as each may include multiple
seed areas. With more seed areas, the initialized region becomes
smaller, and the SUM constraint takes more operations to satisfy.
This causes the runtime of MS and MAS to increase by a small
amount, although the time for MIN and A VG decreases. Increas-
ingu leads to an increase in the heterogeneity improvement from
6.96% at u =2 k to 40.2% at
u =5 k due to higher p.
Ranges with u = ∞ . Table IV shows p values and Fig. 11
gives the construction time and local search time for different
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
392 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
TABLE IV
p VALUES FOR DIFFERENT THRESHOLD RANGES FOR MIN CONSTRAINT COMBINA TIONS
Fig. 11. Runtime for MIN with u = ∞.
Fig. 12. Runtime for MIN with bounded l and u.
constraint combinations. Raising lower bound l ﬁlters more
areas, leaving the rest scattered. This reducesp and signiﬁcantly
lowers runtime. The heterogeneity score improvement reduces
asl increases with up to 17.6% due to decreasing p that narrows
the search space of local search.
Ranges with bounded l and u: We explore bounded ranges
that vary range length while ﬁxing range midpoint. Table IV
gives thep values and Fig. 12(a) shows runtime. When the range
length increases, the p value increases because fewer areas are
ﬁltered out and more regions are initialized. As a result, both
total and construction time increase due to a larger search space.
However, there is no clear trend for the Tabu search time.
With a ﬁxed range length and a higher midpoint, both con-
struction and local search times decrease (Fig. 12(b)). At higher
values, areas split into smaller components, but seed count re-
mains stable. Thus, Steps 2 and 3 ﬁnish faster, reducing runtime.
The p value depends on the correlation between attributes of
MIN and A VG constraints. If not correlated, a higher midpoint
raises the MIN lower bound, ﬁltering more areas while the seed
count stays the same if we assume random attribute distribution
and constant range size. This shrinks the initialization space,
thereby lowering p. However, real attributes may be correlated,
such as POP16UP and EMPLOYED. Raising MIN from[1k, 2k]
to [2k, 3k] ﬁlters extreme A VG values and increases A VG-
compatible seed areas. Thus, when attributes are correlated,
raising the constraint midpoint can either increase or decrease
Fig. 13. Impact of A VG constraint under different conﬁgurations: (a) value
distribution, (b) p and UA for various midpoints, and (c) runtime comparison.
p, depending on the direction and strength of the correlation.
In all cases, the heterogeneity improvement increases when p
increases, by up to 11.3% in this case.
2) A VG Constraint: The average aggregate function is non-
monotonic. Satisfying the constraint can be computationally
heavy with certain ranges. To illustrate this, we explore two
cases: (a) ranges with ﬁxed length and changing midpoints, and
(b) ranges with a ﬁxed midpoint but varying lengths.
Ranges with ﬁxed range length. We ﬁx the A VG range length
to 2k and vary the midpoint from 1k to 4.5k in 0.5k steps. We
focus on the performance of the A VG constraint to exclude the
impact of other constraints. Fig. 13(a) shows the distribution of
the A VG attribute value of the ares in the default dataset, which is
a positively skewed distribution. Most values are below4k, with
outliers reaching up to 6149. Fig. 13(b) showsp and unassigned
areas; Fig. 13(c) shows runtime. For midpoints between 1k and
2.5k, about half of the areas fall within range, and combining
others is relatively easy. Unassigned areas drop to zero at mid-
points 2k and 2.5k, with runtime under 3.2s. The ranges are
also ﬂexible for the Tabu search phase, with the heterogeneity
score improved by up to 30.1% . At 3k ± 1k, most areas fall
belowl, but combining with high-value outliers is still possible.
In addition, as an area is assigned, the newly formed region
may lead to the possibility of assigning the neighboring areas.
Hence, the enclave assignment process continues for multiple
iterations until no further updates can be made. Thus, runtime
increases, but unassigned areas drop signiﬁcantly to 9% Above
3.5k, most areas fall belowl, making region formation difﬁcult.
Most areas remain unassigned, and construction time shortens
due to early termination. Midpoints above 3k also tighten the
A VG constraint, which limits feasible Tabu moves. As a result,
the Tabu search time is negligible and the heterogeneity im-
provements are below 0.4% .
Ranges with ﬁxed midpoint: Following the prior experiment,
we ﬁx the midpoint at 3k
, the most challenging case, and vary
the range length. We include other constraints to show how A VG
can create performance bottlenecks. The p values for different
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 393
TABLE V
p VALUES FOR DIFFERENT THRESHOLD RANGES FOR VA R CONSTRAINT COMBINA TIONS
Fig. 14. Impact of different A VG range lengths
constraint combinations are given in Fig. 14(a), and the runtime
is shown in Fig. 18. The ﬁgures show increasing p values with
longer ranges, but the runtime depends on the range length.
Range length heavily affects construction time, while different
constraint combinations with the same range have less impact.
This is due to A VG dominating the construction phase runtime.
At 3k ± 0.5k, the tight range causes early termination due to
no feasible enclave assignments. However, 60% of the areas
remain unassigned, as shown in Fig. 14(b). Like before, the
range 3k ± 1k is the hardest and dominates the total runtime.
However, the reduction in the number of unassigned areas is also
signiﬁcant for all constraint combinations. Wider ranges cover
more areas, making enclave assignment easier without merging.
Thus, the time is much shorter, and all areas are assigned as
well. The ﬁnal heterogeneity score also reduces when the range
is enlarged due to the reduction in region sizes. Wider ranges
boost heterogeneity improvement up to 21.8% by enabling more
valid local search moves. These results show A VG’s sensitivity
to range selection. V ery narrow ranges ( ±0.5k) leave many
areas unassigned and limit region formation. Overly wide ranges
(±2k) make most areas valid, reducing constraint effectiveness
and forming large, less meaningful regions. The results suggest
that intermediate range settings, such as those centered around
the mean with a span approximating one standard deviation,
achieve a more favorable trade-off. They reduce unassigned
areas while preserving constraint pressure for meaningful par-
titions. This highlights the need to align constraints with data
statistics to balance efﬁciency and output quality.
3) VAR Constraint: The variance constraint is a non-
monotonic constraint that regulates the statistical dispersion
of regions. By adjusting the threshold values, users can guide
how clustered or dispersed attribute values become. We study
its impact in three scenarios: (a) ranges with l = −∞, which
regulates the V AR attribute from being scattered, (b) ranges
with u = ∞, which deﬁnes how clustered the V AR attribute
is allowed to be, and (c) ranges with bounded values of l and
u that show their joint impact on deﬁning the diversity of the
Fig. 15. Runtime for V AR with l = ∞.
Fig. 16. Runtime for V AR with u = ∞.
regions in terms of the V AR attribute values. We set thresholds
based on the EMPLOYED attribute’s overall variance (550k), as
sample variance approximates population variance. We use V
to represent V AR, and combine it with other constraints using
the same notation as before (e.g., MVS = M I N+V A R+S U M ) .
Ranges with l = −∞ .F i g . 15 gives the runtime of the
construction phase when the u changes from 400k to 700k
and the corresponding p values are detailed in Table V.A s u
increases, the runtime drops and the p value increases for all
constraint combinations. This happens because a higheru allows
more scattered regions, making construction easier. Unassigned
areas also drop from ˜50% to ˜15%, which also corresponds to
the reduction in construction difﬁculty. Heterogeneity improves
by 7.4% for MV and VS , but only slightly for MVS .
Ranges with u = ∞: Fig. 16 shows runtime and Table V
gives the p value. Runtime increases but remains manageable
until l approaches the dataset’s variance. When l ≥600k,t h e
V AR heuristic from Section V- Bactivates to handle the strict
constraint. When the attempt limit is set to 5% of total areas,
runtime grows from 19.3s to 137.6s However, the p value is
improved from 104 to 175 while reducing the percentage of
unassigned areas from 47.3% to 25.7% . Further increasing the
limit yields little beneﬁt to result quality. The ideal limit depends
on the dataset and attribute; lowering it can speed up runtime at
the cost of quality. The Tabu search time is negligible because
of the difﬁculty of ﬁnding a feasible move given the stringent
V AR constraint. The heuristic score improvement decreases
from 4.5% to 0.08% as l increases.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
394 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 17. Runtime for V AR with bounded l and u.
TABLE VI
p VALUES FOR DIFFERENT THRESHOLD RANGES FOR SUM CONSTRAINT
COMBINA TIONS
Fig. 18. Runtime for A VG with different range lengths.
Ranges with boundedl andu: Fig. 17(a) shows the runtime for
varying range lengths while Fig. 17(b) shows results for shifting
midpoints. Trends are similar to the case with unbounded u,
as shown in Table V and the two ﬁgures. Narrower ranges or
higher midpoints lead to longer construction time, especially
for [600k, 700k]. The number of unassigned areas also increases
from 8.3% to 25.8% as the length of the range narrows. V and
MV witness an increase in unassigned areas when the midpoint
increases, from 12.1% to 26.1% . In VS andMVS , unassigned
areas stay at ˜25% due to limited attempts to satisfy both SUM
and V AR constraints. The heterogeneity increase is below 1%
for all constraints in both cases.
4) SUM Constraint: SUM constraints are the only type of
constraints that are used in existing state-of-the-art solutions
for the max-p regions (MP-regions) problem. We compare with
them, denoted as MP , using a single SUM constraint with an open
upper bound, i.e.,[l,∞). Table VI showsp values; Figs. 19 and
20 show runtime under SUM combinations. Withu = ∞, higher
l lower p, while runtime remains stable for both methods.
FaCT matches MP-regions inp value under identical constraints
(Table VI). But FaCT runs in under half the time of MP-regions
whenu =3 0k or 40k. In addition, the FaCT algorithm handles
generic types of constraints, which are not supported by the
competitor. As l increase, heterogeneity improves-up to 72.6%
for MP and S, 13.8% for MS, and less than 1% for AS and
Fig. 19. Runtime for SUM with u = ∞.
Fig. 20. Runtime for SUM with a changing range length.
TABLE VII
IMPACT OF SPATIALLYEXTENSIVE ATTRIBUTE SELECTION
MAS. Larger regions enable more local search moves, boosting
heterogeneity. For bounded threshold ranges, in Table VI and
Fig. 20, both p values and construction runtime decrease when
the lower bound l increases and the trend is similar to u = ∞.
Heterogeneity improves with range length: up to 30.4% (S),
6.9% (MS), 3.76% (AS), 2.49% (MAS). However, the unas-
signed areas could reach up to 25.1% when u is bounded for
MS, AS, and MAS. This is because areas are removed so that
each region does not exceedu. FaCT reports output stats to help
users adjust threshold ranges effectively.
E. Impact of Extensive Attribute Selection
We tested four spatially extensive attributes in an A VG con-
straint, keeping other settings unchanged. Table VII shows
that attribute choice greatly affects region count, heterogene-
ity, and unassigned areas. For example, POP16UP gave 317
low-heterogeneity regions, but HOUSEHOLDS yielded only 10
high-heterogeneity ones, which highlight the role of attribute
distribution. Thus, choosing the right attribute is key to mean-
ingful and reliable results.
F . FaCT Scalability
This section evaluates FaCT’s scalability. We tested various
constraint combinations on nine datasets using default thresh-
olds. The dataset size of the 50k dataset is 17 times the largest
dataset used in the existing literature of regionalization [10],
[56]. As the A VG constraint is identiﬁed as a clear performance
bottleneck when the range is set to be 3k ± 1k, our discussion
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 395
Fig. 21. Runtime varying datasets 1k to 4k.
Fig. 22. Runtime varying datasets for 10k-50k.
Fig. 23. Runtime varying datasets for A VG constraint with range 3k± 1k.
contains two parts. First, we show results with A VG at its
default range (Fig.21,F i g .22) to assess scalability under normal
settings, then examine A VG with a range of3k ± 1k (Fig. 23)t o
study scalability in more extreme cases. Figs. 21, 22 show linear
runtime growth for M and quadratic for others when A VG isn’t
a bottleneck. For all datasets, FaCT provides a very acceptable
runtime for regionalization applications.
Fig. 23 shows that A VG ( 3k ± 1k) greatly increases con-
sturction time. As input size grows, runtime increases faster
than in normal settings, showing reduced scalability for A VG.
However, runtime doesn’t always grow with dataset size. For
example, the 4k dataset runs faster than 2k, except in AS and
MAS. This difference is caused by the merging procedure in the
A VG constraint. Generally, more areas are easier to aggregate
in regions that satisfy the A VG constraint. In all cases, the
construction time scales much better than the Tabu time, and
it still provides a solution with almost the same quality.
G. Incremental Update Performance
This section studies the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the
incremental update of queries.
Fig. 24 gives the runtime of the local incremental update
with ˜10% to ˜50% regions updated and the comparison with a
total reconstruction. Updates are triggered by randomly altering
area attributes from 0% to 200% of their original values. The
Fig. 24. Runtime for local incremental update.
Fig. 25. Runtime for global incremental update when A VG is the bottleneck.
Fig. 26. Runtime for global incremental update for 10k-50 k.
performance of the local incremental update is promising. For
the slowest case (AS), updating 10% takes just 0.124s, and 50%
takes 1.146s over 100 iterations. This is much faster than6.301s
needed for full recomputation. For MP-regions (S), updating
10% to 50% takes only 1.45% to 9.28% of the full time, while
preserving the result quality. This update method reconstructs
only nearby areas, reducing input size and runtime. Across all
datasets, local updates take < 1s and maintain high p values
and low unassigned areas. Thus, FaCT efﬁciently handles small
local changes using incremental updates.
Secondly, we discuss the performance of the global incremen-
tal update. We focus on two scenarios: identiﬁed bottlenecks
and large datasets. Since only construction changes in global
updates, we omit tabu search times. Fig. 25 shows the runtime
of 2k-8 k datasets with A VG bottlenecking the construction
while Fig. 26 depicts the runtime for large datasets with size
10k to 50k areas. In both ﬁgures, the hat (e.g.,MA ¯S) marks the
changed constraint. Thresholds are slightly adjusted to keep con-
straint difﬁculty consistent.NC denotes no change; the algorithm
reloads the previous results. According to Fig. 25, validating the
constraints and reloading the previous result is efﬁcient, taking
less than 1 s for all the datasets. ¯MAS changes ﬁltering/seeding,
requiring full recomputation. Thus, ¯MAS has the same runtime
as MAS (see Fig. 18). However, when the algorithm manages
to avoid recomputing the A VG constraint by only incremental
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
396 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 27. Effect of disturbance intensity for S.
Fig. 28. Effect of disturbance intensity for MAS
TABLE VIII
p VALUES,C ONSTRUCTION TIME, AND NO.O F UNASSIGNED AREAS FOR THE
FACT CONSTRUCTION AND FACT-IG CONSTRUCTION
updating the SUM constraint, the runtime is signiﬁcantly shorter.
Construction time drops 52.6% -97.9% (8 k to 2 k datasets).
This avoids the A VG bottleneck noted in SectionIX-D2.F i g .26
shows the runtime for large datasets with no dominant constraint.
Reloading unchanged results remains fast even for large datasets.
Time savings range from tens M ¯AS to hundreds of seconds
MA ¯S , though the ratio is smaller. Result quality ( p value and
unassigned areas) remains unchanged.
H. Iterated Greedy Performance
This section evaluates FaCT-IG performance in improving
IMS results compared to standard FaCT The comparison fo-
cuses on the construction phase using IG We ﬁrst identify the
best disturbance intensity for effective yet efﬁcient IG updates.
Experiments show a clear link between disturbance intensity, p
value, and runtime. Figs. 27 and 28 illustrate this trend for SUM
constraint and for all constraint types. The highestp value occurs
when disturbance is 4% to 6% . Higher disturbance increases
runtime due to more deconstructed regions and larger input
sizes. Above 10%,p value drops while runtime continues to rise
for all constraints. With optimal disturbance set, we compare
p value, runtime, and unassigned areas. Each setting is tested
10 times, and results are averaged (Table VIII). The results that
are obtained by FaCT-IG are marked with “-IG” postﬁx. For
instance, S is from FaCT, while S-IG is the improved version
from FaCT-IG. MP refers to the baseline MP-regions algorithm
for SUM constraints. Overall, FaCT-IGachieves higherp values
and is often more efﬁcient. For MP-regions, FaCT-IGproduces
401 regions, compared to 373 from MP-regions after 100 runs.
Since all areas are assigned and p is higher, FaCT-IG is strictly
better. FaCT-IGis faster since it only reﬁnes one initial solution
instead of repeating full constructions. The difference in the
input size of each iteration reduces the runtime drastically.
Similarly, the p value of MS is also improved from 342 to 384
without sacriﬁcing the number of unassigned areas. However,
the result is more controversial for the other constraint combi-
nations involving A VG. MA, AS, and MAS see higherp values
but also more unassigned areas. Because the construction of
the feasible solution is designed according to the mathematical
property of the constraints and enclaves are assigned step by
step, merging partial IG results makes them hard to reassign. For
monotonic constraints like MP-regions, this isn’t an issue. But
for others, more unassigned areas may outweigh p and runtime
gains.
I. Summary of Results
All experiments demonstrate that the FaCT algorithm efﬁ-
ciently generates high-quality, feasible solutions within seconds
in most cases. It scales well to large datasets and adapts ef-
fectively when more areas are ﬁltered or fewer seed areas are
available. While the impact of the centrality constraint varies
with its range and attribute distribution, performance remains
reasonable overall. Counting constraints allow the MP-regions
problem to be treated as a special case of IMS, maintaining
both scalability and quality. The local and global incremental
update mechanisms offer ﬂexibility for interactive reﬁnement.
Effectiveness tests show that FaCT produces compact, feasible
region structures, validating the strength of its optimization.
FaCT-IGfurther enhances results by applying the IG algorithm,
outperforming existing methods and demonstrating potential for
broader metaheuristic integration.
X. C
ONCLUSION
This paper introduces an incremental max-p regionalization
with statistical constraints (IMS) problem that extends the exist-
ing regionalization problems with statistical user-deﬁned con-
straints. The IMS problem clusters a set of spatial areas into
homogeneous regions that satisfy the user-deﬁned constraints.
The IMS problem enables enriched types of constraints that
support SQL-inspired aggregate functions, MIN, MAX, A VG,
V AR, SUM, and COUNT, with range operators. We prove the
NP-hardness of the IMS problem. To tackle this problem, we
propose FaCT; a three-phase algorithm that ﬁnds an approximate
solution with a maximum number of regions and minimum over-
all heterogeneity. The ﬁrst phase checks the feasibility of ﬁnding
a solution given the input constraints. It also provides users with
insightful information to tune their input and enable ﬂexible
exploration of various datasets. The second phase constructs an
initial solution, and the third phase further optimizes it to provide
a ﬁnal solution. We have empirically demonstrated the capability
of FaCT to provide efﬁcient and effective performance on var-
ious real datasets. FaCT supports local and global incremental
update to support exploratory analysis and respond to changes
in attributes and constraints efﬁciently. We also combine the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
KANG et al.: IMS: INCREMENTAL MAX-P REGIONALIZA TION WITH STA TISTICAL CONSTRAINTS 397
Iterated Greedy metaheuristic algorithm with FaCT to further
improve the quality of the construction.
In our forthcoming research, we aim to delve deeper into
the potential of integrating cutting-edge metaheuristic algo-
rithms to enhance our regionalization analysis. Furthermore, we
are keenly interested in exploring multi-objective optimization
techniques that can enhance algorithm performance through
parallelization.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Benedetti, F. Piersimoni, G. Pignataro, and F. Vidoli, “The iden-
tiﬁcation of spatially constrained homogeneous clusters of COVID-19
transmission in Italy,” Regional Sci. Policy Pract., vol. 12, pp. 1169–1187,
2020.
[2] M. P . Armstrong et al., “Decision support for regionalization: A spatial de-
cision support system for regionalizing service delivery systems,”Comput.
Environ. Urban Syst., vol. 15, pp. 37–53, 1991.
[3] K. S. Cheruvelil, P . A. Soranno, M. T. Bremigan, T. Wagner, and S. L.
Martin, “Grouping lakes for water quality assessment and monitoring: The
roles of regionalization and spatial scale,” J. Environ. Manage., vol. 41,
pp. 425–440, 2008.
[4] A. El Kenawy, J. I. López-Moreno, and S. M. Vicente-Serrano, “Sum-
mer temperature extremes in northeastern Spain: Spatial regionalization
and links to atmospheric circulation (1960–2006),” IEEE Trans. Autom.
Control, vol. 113, pp. 387–405, 2013.
[5] S. Schönbrodt-Stitt, A. Bosch, T. Behrens, H. Hartmann, X. Shi, and T.
Scholten, “Approximation and spatial regionalization of rainfall erosivity
based on sparse data in a mountainous catchment of the yangtze river
in central China,” J. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. , vol. 20, pp. 6917–6933,
2013.
[6] N. Bullen, G. Moon, and K. Jones, “Deﬁning localities for health planning:
A GIS approach,” Social Sci. Med. , vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 801–816, 1996.
[7] Z. Chen, P . Cheng, L. Chen, X. Lin, and C. Shahabi, “Fair task assignment
in spatial crowdsourcing,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment , vol. 13, no. 12,
pp. 2479–2492, 2020.
[8] T. Song et al., “Trichromatic online matching in real-time spatial
crowdsourcing,” in Proc. IEEE 33rd Int. Conf. Data Eng. , 2017,
pp. 1009–1020.
[9] D. J. Rossiter and R. J. Johnston, “Program group: The identiﬁcation of all
possible solutions to a constituency-delimitation problem,” Environ. Plan.
A, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 231–238, 1981.
[10] J. C. Duque, L. Anselin, and S. J. Rey, “The Max-P-regions problem,” J.
Regional Sci., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 397–419, 2012.
[11] D. Arribas-Bel and C. R. Schmidt, “Self-organizing maps and the US urban
spatial structure,” Eur . Phys. J., vol. 40, pp. 362–371, 2013.
[12] J. C. Duque, J. E. Patino, L. A. Ruiz, and J. E. Pardo-Pascual, “Mea-
suring intra-urban poverty using land cover and texture metrics derived
from remote sensing data,” Landscape Urban Plan. , vol. 135, pp. 11–21,
2015.
[13] R. Fragoso, C. Rego, and V . Bushenkov, “Clustering of territorial areas:
A multi-criteria districting problem,” J. Quantitative Econ., vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 179–198, 2016.
[14] J. E. Patino, J. C. Duque, J. E. Pardo-Pascual, and L. A. Ruiz, “Using
remote sensing to assess the relationship between crime and the urban
layout,” Appl. Geogr ., vol. 55, pp. 48–60, 2014.
[15] S. J. Rey and M. L. Sastré-Gutiérrez, “Interregional inequality dynamics
in Mexico,” Spatial Econ. Anal. , vol. 5, pp. 277–298, 2010.
[16] S. E. Spielman and D. C. Folch, “Reducing uncertainty in the ameri-
can community survey through data-driven regionalization,” PLoS One ,
vol. 10, 2015, Art. no. e0115626.
[17] D. A. Stow, C. D. Lippitt, and J. R. Weeks, “Geographic object-based
delineation of neighborhoods of Accra, Ghana using QuickBird satellite
imagery,” Photogrammetric Eng. Remote Sens. , vol. 76, pp. 907–914,
2010.
[18] “Build balanced zones (spatial statistics)—ArcGIS Pro,” Accessed: May
5, 2025 . [Online]. Available: https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/latest/
tool-reference/spatial-statistics/buildbalancedzones.htm
[19] PySAL Developers, “Max-P regionalization — spopt manual, PySAL
spatial optimization module,” 2023. [Online]. Available:https://pysal.org/
spopt/notebooks/maxp.html
[20] M. Camacho-Collados, F. Liberatore, and J. M. Angulo, “A multi-criteria
police districting problem for the efﬁcient and effective design of patrol
sector,” Eur . J. Oper . Res., vol. 246, no. 2, pp. 674–684, 2015.
[21] Y . Kang, “Modeling the enriched Max-P region problem ASA
Mixed-integer programming problem,” 2022. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://github.com/Y unfanKang/FaCT/blob/main/EMP-MIP/
EMP_MIP_Formulation.pdf
[22] Gurobi Optimization, LLC, “Gurobi optimizer reference manual,”
2018. [Online]. Available:https://docs.gurobi.com/projects/optimizer/en/
current/index.html
[23] Y . Kang, “Solving the MIP formulation of EMP with Gurobi solver,”
2022. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Y unfanKang/FaCT/blob/
main/EMP-MIP/
[24] F. Glover and M. Laguna, “Tabu Search,” in Handbook of
Combinatorial Optimization . Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1998,
pp. 2093–2229.
[25] Y . Kang and A. Magdy, “EMP: Max-P regionalization with enriched con-
straints,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Conf. Data Eng. , 2022, pp. 1914–1926.
[26] A. Ferligoj and V . Batagelj, “Clustering with relational constraint,” Psy-
chometrika, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 413–426, 1982.
[27] J. Byfuglien and A. Nordgård, “Region-building—a comparison of meth-
ods,” Norwegian J. Geogr ., vol. 27, pp. 127–151, 1973.
[28] L. P . Lefkovitch, “Conditional clustering,” Biometrics, vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 43–58, 1980.
[29] F. Murtagh, “A survey of algorithms for contiguity-constrained clustering
and related problems,” Comput. J., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 82–88, 1985.
[30] A. Gordon, “A survey of constrained classiﬁcation,” Comput. Statist. Data
Anal., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 17–29, 1996.
[31] P . Hansen, B. Jaumard, C. Meyer, B. Simeone, and V . Doring, “Maximum
split clustering under connectivity constraints,” J. Classiﬁcation, vol. 20,
no. 2, pp. 143–180, 2003.
[32] J. C. Duque, R. L. Church, and R. S. Middleton, “The P-regions problem,”
Geographical Anal., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 104–126, 2011.
[33] Y . Liu, A. R. Mahmood, A. Magdy, and S. Rey, “PRUC: P-regions
with user-deﬁned constraint,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment , vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 491–503, 2021.
[34] H. Kim, Y . Chun, and K. Kim, “Delimitation of functional regions using a
P-regions problem approach,”Int. Regional Sci. Rev., vol. 38, pp. 235–263,
2015.
[35] K. Kim, Y . Chun, and H. Kim, “P-functional clusters location problem for
detecting spatial clusters with covering approach,” Geographical Anal. ,
vol. 49, pp. 101–121, 2017.
[36] X. Y e, B. She, and S. Benya, “Exploring regionalization in the network
urban space,” J. Geovisualization Spatial Anal. , vol. 2, 2018, Art. no. 4.
[37] J. Laura, W. Li, S. J. Rey, and L. Anselin, “Parallelization of a re-
gionalization heuristic in distributed computing platforms–a case study
of parallel-P-compact-regions problem,” Int. J. Geographical Inf. Sci. ,
vol. 29, pp. 536–555, 2015.
[38] W. Li, R. L. Church, and M. F. Goodchild, “An extendable heuristic
framework to solve the P-compact-Regions problem for urban economic
modeling,” Comput. Environ. Urban Syst., vol. 43, pp. 1–13, 2014.
[39] W. Li, R. L. Church, and M. F. Goodchild, “The P-compact-regions
problem,” Geographical Anal., vol. 46, pp. 250–273, 2014.
[40] D. C. Folch and S. E. Spielman, “Identifying regions based on ﬂexible
user-deﬁned constraints,” Int. J. Geographical Inf. Sci. , vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 164–184, 2014.
[41] B. She, J. C. Duque, and X. Y e, “The network-Max-P-regions model,” Int.
J. Geographical Inf. Sci., vol. 31, pp. 962–981, 2017.
[42] J. H. Danumah et al., “Flood risk assessment and mapping in Abidjan
district using multi-criteria analysis (AHP) model and geoinformation
techniques,(cote d’ivoire),” Geoenvironmental Disasters , vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 1–13, 2016.
[43] T. Vilutien˙e and E. K. Zavadskas, “The application of multi-criteria analy-
sis to decision support for the facility management of a residential district,”
J. Civil Eng. Manage., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 241–252, 2003.
[44] S. Y anık, J. Kalcsics, S. Nickel, and B. Bozkaya, “A multi-period multi-
criteria districting problem applied to primary care scheme with grad-
ual assignment,” Int. Trans. Oper . Res. , vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1676–1697,
2019.
[45] S. Openshaw, “A regionalisation program for large data sets,” Comput.
Appl., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 136–147, 1973.
[46] S. Openshaw, “Classifying and regionalizing census data,” Census Users’
Handbook, pp. 239–270, 1995.
[47] R. M. Assunção, M. C. Neves, G. Câmara, and C. da C. Freitas, “Efﬁcient
regionalization techniques for socio-economic geographical units using
minimum spanning trees,” Int. J. Geographical Inf. Sci. , vol. 20, no. 7,
pp. 797–811, 2006.
[48] R. S. Garﬁnkel and G. L. Nemhauser, “Optimal political districting by
implicit enumeration techniques,” Manage. Sci., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. B–495,
1970.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
398 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
[49] S. Openshaw, “A geographical solution to scale and aggregation problems
in region-building, partitioning and spatial modelling,” Trans. Inst. Brit.
Geographers, vol. 2, pp. 459–472, 1977.
[50] H. Alrashid and A. Magdy, “A scalable uniﬁed system for seeding region-
alization queries,” in Proc. 18th Int. Symp. Spatial Temporal Data , 2023,
pp. 96–105.
[51] O. Aydin, M. V . Janikas, R. Assunção, and T.-H. Lee, “Skater-con: Unsu-
pervised regionalization via stochastic tree partitioning within a consensus
framework using random spanning trees,” inProc. 2nd ACM SIGSPATIAL
Int. Workshop AI Geographic Knowl. Discov., 2018, pp. 33–42.
[52] R. Wei, S. Rey, and E. Knaap, “Efﬁcient regionalization for spatially
explicit neighborhood delineation,” Int. J. Geographical Inf. Sci. , vol. 35,
no. 1, pp. 135–151, 2021, doi: 10.1080/13658816.2020.1759806.
[53] A. Buckley, “Understanding statistical data for mapping purposes,” 2013.
[Online]. Available: https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/mapstatdata.pdf
[54] K. Andreev and H. Racke, “Balanced graph partitioning,” Theory Comput.
Syst., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 929–939, 2006.
[55] “NP-hardness of MP-regions,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://cs.ucr.
edu/amr/MP_Regionalization_NPHardness.pdf
[56] R. Wei, S. Rey, and E. Knaap, “Efﬁcient regionalization for spatially
explicit neighborhood delineation,” Int. J. Geographical Inf. Sci. , vol. 35,
pp. 1–17, 2020.
[57] W. Li, Q. Kang, H. Kong, C. Liu, and Y . Kang, “A novel iterated greedy
algorithm for detecting communities in complex network,” Social Netw.
Anal. Mining, vol. 10, pp. 1–17, 2020.
[58] R. Ruiz and T. Stützle, “A simple and effective iterated greedy algorithm
for the permutation ﬂowshop scheduling problem,” Eur . J. Oper . Res.,
vol. 177, no. 3, pp. 2033–2049, 2007.
[59] T. Stützle and R. Ruiz, “Iterated greedy,” in Handbook of Heuristics .
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2018, pp. 547–577.
[60] Q. Kang, H. He, and J. Wei, “An effective iterated greedy algorithm for
reliability-oriented task allocation in distributed computing systems,” J.
Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 1106–1115, 2013.
[61] Y . Kang, “Fact,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
Y unfanKang/FaCT
[62] “Southern California Association of Governments - SCAG,” 2020. [On-
line]. Available: https://scag.ca.gov/
[63] U. C. Bureau, “Explore census data,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//data.census.gov/cedsci/
[64] S. C. A. of Governments, “Scag open data portal,” 2021 [Online]. Avail-
able: https://gisdata-scag.opendata.arcgis.com/
[65] “Welcome to the QGIS project!,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
qgis.org/
Yunfan Kang received the bachelor of engineering
degree in computer science from the University of
Hong Kong, and the PhD degree in computer science
and engineering from the University of California,
Riverside. He is a postdoc research associate with the
CyberGIS Center for Advanced Digital and Spatial
Studies, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.
His research interests include GeoAI, spatial analysis,
and spatial networks. He has published more than 20
works in various journals and conferences.
Yiyang Bianreceived the bachelor of engineering de-
gree in computer science from Central China Normal
University, and the MS degree in computer science
from Case Western Reserve University. He is cur-
rently working toward the PhD degree in computer
science with the University of California, Riverside.
His work bridges database systems and geographic
information science, aiming to enhance spatial data
analysis through intelligent indexing, optimization
techniques, and machine learning integration.
Qinma Kang received the master’s degree in com-
puter science and technology from Xidian University,
and the PhD degree in computer software and theory
from Tongji University. He is an associate professor
with the Department of Computer Science, School of
Mechanical, Electrical and Information Engineering,
Shandong University. His research interests include
data mining, intelligent computing, blockchain, so-
cial networks, and machine learning. He has pub-
lished more than 30 research papers in leading aca-
demic journals and international conferences.
Amr Magdy (Senior Member, IEEE) is an asso-
ciate professor of computer science and engineering
with the University of California, Riverside and the
current chair of the ACM SIGSPA TIAL Recogni-
tion Committee. His research interests include spa-
tial Big Data and systems-oriented techniques. His
work has appeared in leading venues, such as IEEE
ICDE, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, ACM SIGSPA TIAL, VLDB, theVLDB
Journal, ACM SIGMOD, and ACM TSAS. He has
received several research awards, including NSF CA-
REER, the Google-CAHSI, and Microsoft Research awards in 2023. His papers
are shortlisted as best papers of IEEE ICDE’14, ACM SIGSPA TIAL’19’23,
IEEE MDM’23, and SSTD’23, and shortlisted for ACM SIGSPA TIAL 10-Y ear
Impact Award in 2024. He also won the best demo award in ACM SIGSPA-
TIAL’24, and was recognized with the Distinguished PC Member Award in
ACM SIGMOD 2024.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Illinois. Downloaded on January 31,2026 at 22:51:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.