SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION
METHODS: AS URVEY
JUAN CARLOS DUQUE
Regional Analysis Laboratory (REGAL), Department of Geography,
San Diego State University, jduque@rohan.sdsu.edu
RAU´L RAMOS
Grup d’Ana`lisi Quantitativa Regional (AQR),
Universitat de Barcelona, rramos@ub.edu
JORDI SURIN˜ACH
Grup d’Ana`lisi Quantitativa Regional (AQR),
Universitat de Barcelona, jsurinach@ub.edu
This article reviews almost four decades of contributions on the subject of supervised regiona-
lization methods. These methods aggregate a set of areas into a predeﬁned number of spatially
contiguous regions while optimizing certain aggregation criteria. The authors present a taxo-
nomic scheme that classiﬁes a wide range of regionalization methods into eight groups, based
on the strategy applied for satisfying the spatial contiguity constraint. The article concludes
by providing a qualitative comparison of these groups in terms of a set of certain characteris-
tics, and by suggesting future lines of research for extending and improving these methods.
Keywords: regionalization; constrained clustering; analytical regions
Statistical spatial data analysis often requires the aggregation of basic spatial
units (areas) into larger units (regions) to preserve conﬁdentiality, to minimize
population differences, to reduce the effects of outliers or inaccuracies in the
data, or simply to facilitate the visualization and interpretation of information in
maps (Wise, Haining, and Ma 1997, 2001).
An aggregation of this kind can be carried out in two different ways. The ﬁrst
uses as its reference point predeﬁned ofﬁcial or normative aggregations, such as
counties, districts, or states. The second aggregates areas into analytical regions
The authors thank the anonymous IRSR reviewers for their insightful and helpful comments during
the review process, and David Folch for editing. The usual disclaimer applies. Jordi Surin ˜ach and
Rau´l Ramos also acknowledge the support of CICYT SEJ2005-04348/ECON project. Please address
correspondence to: Juan Carlos Duque, Department of Geography. San Diego State University, 5500
Campanile Drive, San Diego, CA 92182-4493; phone: (619) 594-8032; fax: (619) 594 4938; e-mail:
jduque@rohan.sdsu.edu.
DOI: 10.1177/0160017607301605
/C2112007 Sage Publications
INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW 30, 3: 195–220 (July 2007)
in such a way that the resulting regions are conveniently related to the pheno-
mena under examination.
The Statistical Ofﬁce of the European Communities (Eurostat 2006) provides
a clear differentiation between these two types of regions:
Normative regions are the expression of a political will; their limits are ﬁxed
according to the tasks allocated to the territorial communities, to the sizes of popu-
lation necessary to carry out these tasks efﬁciently and economically, or according
to historical, cultural and other factors. Whereas analytical (or functional) regions
are deﬁned according to analytical requirements: functional regions are formed by
zones grouped together using geographical criteria (e.g., altitude or type of soil)
or/and using socio-economic criteria (e.g., homogeneity, complementarity or
polarity of regional economies). (para. 4–5)
Although the use of normative regions has been a common practice among
regional scientists, in many cases statistical inference based on regions of this
type may be strongly affected by aggregation problems, such as the ecological
fallacy (Robinson 1950), the modiﬁable areal unit problem (Openshaw 1977a,
1977b, 1984; Openshaw and Taylor 1981; Arbia 1989) or aggregation bias
(Fotheringham and Wong 1991; Amrhein and Flowerdew 1992; Paelinck and
Klaassen 1979; Paelinck 2000).
In this article we focus on methods that can be applied to design analytical
regions. We will refer to them as regionalization methods , to use a term that
encompasses the wide range of ﬁelds in which these methods have been created
or applied.
1 The variety makes it difﬁcult to provide a single deﬁnition of the
regionalization problem, but we can enumerate some characteristics that are
common to any method that can be used to deﬁne analytical regions:
1. All the methods aggregate geographical areas into a predeﬁned number of regions,
while optimizing a particular aggregation criterion;
2. The areas within a region must be geographically connected (the spatial contiguity
constraint);
3. The number of regions must be smaller than or equal to the number of areas;
4. Each area must be assigned to one and only one region;
5. Each region must contain at least one area.
Another characteristic of the methods considered here is that they are super-
vised, in that they assume prior knowledge about the aggregation process: rele-
vant variables for the aggregation, number of regions to be designed, the regional
spatial contiguity constraint, and the existence of an aggregation criterion.
The purpose of this study is not to carry out a model competition but to make
a qualitative comparison of the characteristics of the different methods that can
be used in the context of the regionalization problem (as deﬁned above). So our
main contribution is to present a taxonomy of regionalization methods primarily
based on the strategy used to satisfy the contiguity constraint, which is the main
196 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
particularity of all the methods included in this article. Previous related studies
are the articles by Fischer (1980), Murtagh (1985) and Gordon (1996, 1999).
However, these articles provide in-depth analyses of some of these methods
rather than an exhaustive review.
The structure of the article is depicted in ﬁgure 1, where the regionalization
methods are classiﬁed into two main branches. The ﬁrst branch, discussed in
section 2, includes those approaches where the spatial contiguity constraint is
indirectly satisﬁed. Section 3 covers the second branch of ﬁgure 1, which
includes the approaches where the spatial contiguity constraint is explicitly
included within the algorithm. In the last section, we present the main conclu-
sions of this research.
ALGORITHMS WITHOUT AN EXPLICIT
SPATIAL CONTIGUITY CONSTRAINT
This section describes regionalization methods in which the contiguity con-
straint is indirectly satisﬁed, this is, methods that do not incorporate an explicit
procedure for satisfying the spatial contiguity constraint. This condition is
usually applied a posteriori.
We classify these methods into two groups: methods that apply conventional
clustering and in which the resulting clusters are revised in terms of spatial con-
tiguity, and methods that force spatial contiguity by maximizing regional
compactness.
R
EGIONALIZATION VIA CONVENTIONAL CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS
This is probably the simplest regionalization method. Regionalization via
conventional clustering algorithms was proposed by Openshaw (1973) as a
methodological approach for regionalizing large data sets, comprising two
stages. The ﬁrst stage applies any conventional partitioning, or hierarchical,
clustering algorithm to aggregate areas that are similar in terms of a set of
variables.
2 In the second stage, each cluster is revised in terms of spatial conti-
guity by applying the following rule: if the areas included in the same cluster
are geographically disconnected, then each subset of contiguous areas assigned
to the same cluster is deﬁned as a different region. Openshaw and Wymer
(1995) formalized this method on a step-by-step basis for classifying and regio-
nalizing census data.
Note that the number of clusters deﬁned in the ﬁrst stage is always smaller
than or equal to the number of contiguous regions resulting in the second stage.
Thus, adjustments in the number of clusters are required to obtain the number of
regions desired. In some cases, this is not possible; for example, an increment
(reduction) of one unit in the number of clusters in the ﬁrst stage can generate
an increment (reduction) greater than one in the number of regions in the second
stage.
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 197
Openshaw and Wymer (1995) stressed the fact that regional homogeneity is
guaranteed in the ﬁrst stage. Moreover, this strategy may also help in providing
evidence of spatial dependence between the areas. Thus, when the clusters in
the ﬁrst stage tend to be spatially contiguous, this may imply that the classiﬁca-
tion variables have some spatial pattern.
Another characteristic of this methodology is that it does not impose regional
compactness.
3 In this case, the regional shape depends heavily on the spatial dis-
tribution of the classiﬁcation variables and on the clustering algorithm chosen
for the analysis. Johnston (1968), Lankford (1969), and Fischer (1980) pointed
out that the selection of the clustering algorithm is very important for identifying
certain spatial patterns. For example, the centroid and Ward’s algorithms can
easily identify circular and dense spatial patterns, whereas single linkage algo-
rithm is useful to identify elongated spatial patterns.
Finally, when optimizing the aggregation criterion, conventional clustering
algorithms like the k-means approach (MacQueen 1967) only allow improving
moves. This makes the algorithm converge quickly, mainly because it can easily
be trapped in suboptimal solutions. It is also known that the ﬁnal solution is very
sensitive to changes in the initial centroids. One approach to this problem con-
sists of solving it with different initial centroids and then selecting the best
solution. Openshaw and Wymer (1995) proposed a simulated annealing variant
to this algorithm,
4 which allows nonimproving moves as a way to force the algo-
rithm to explore more solutions and avoid suboptimal ones.
REGIONALIZATION VIA MAXIMIZATION OF REGIONAL COMPACTNESS
Another way to obtain spatially contiguous regions is to force the regions to
be as compact as possible. This strategy was introduced in the early 1960s by
Weaver and Hess (1963) as a methodological approach to designing political
districts. The authors saw the opportunity to adapt the mathematical formulation
for solving the warehouse location-allocation problem to the political districting
problem. The aim is to select a subset of areas to be region centers (warehouses)
to which the other areas (customers) are assigned.
The aggregation criterion consists of maximizing regional compactness by
minimizing the sum of the moments of inertia, deﬁned as the product of the
FIGURE 1. Taxonomy of Methods for Solving Regionalization Problems
198 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
population per area and the squared distance from the centroid of each area to
the region center to which it was assigned. 5 It is important to note that region
centers are not a decision variable but a parameter in the formulation. The only
decision variable in the models is the assignation of areas to the predeﬁned
region centers.
The formulation also requires exactly equal populations in the regions. To
satisfy this constraint, fractional assignations of one or more areas to more than
one region must be allowed. An iterative procedure ﬁxes those fractional assign-
ments and recalculates the new regional centers. When the solution without
fractional assignments leads to a change of the regional centers, the warehouse
location-allocation model is solved again with this new set of centers. The process
stops when no change of centers is needed after solving fractional assignments.
The satisfaction of the spatial contiguity constraint is not always guaranteed,
since the assignation of the areas to their closest regional center is based on a
weighted distance measure (population • distance). Thus, a ﬁnal inspection of
the ﬁnal solution is required to correct spatial disconnections.
Hess et al. (1965) made a more formal presentation of this method. The frag-
mentation of areas is theoretically solved by relaxing the equal population con-
straint to a ‘‘nearly equal’’ population requirement that allows the regional
population to be between a lower and an upper bound.
6 This relaxation makes it
possible to formulate the problem as an integer programming model with a deci-
sion variable x
ij = 1 if the population of area j is assigned to the center i, and
xij = 0 otherwise. xij = 1 with i = j means that area i is selected as region center.
A ﬁnal revision for spatial contiguity is still required.
Kaiser (1966) proposed an aggregation criterion based on a weighted combi-
nation of two components. The ﬁrst component is a measure of population
equality , in which the population of each region should be as close as possible to
the ratio between the total population and the number of regions to be designed.
The second component is a measure of relative geometric compactness,
7 where
the shape of each region should be as close as possible to a circle. This relative
compactness is calculated as the proportion of the geometric moment of inertia
for region j and the moment of inertia of a circle with the same geometric area.
The minimum value of this quotient is one, signifying that region j is a perfect
circle. For a given solution, the global compactness is measured as the average of
the relative compactness for all regions. Kaiser’s regionalization procedure starts
from an initial feasible solution that is improved, in terms of the aggregation cri-
terion, by moving areas between regions. Two types of moves are allowed: ﬁrst,
moving an area from its region to every other region; and second, exchanging
every pair of areas belonging to different regions.
8 Only improving moves are
accepted, which means that the process may well be trapped in local optimal
solutions and be sensitive to the starting solution. The iteration process stops
when no improving moves are possible. Finally, feasibility in terms of contiguity
constraint depends on the weight given to the population equality component
with respect to the compactness component.
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 199
Mills (1967) extends the Hess et al. (1965) location-allocation approach by
taking into account natural boundaries in the regionalization process in such a
way that a region is not split by these types of boundaries.
9 This condition is
achieved by performing what he called permanent assignations , which consist
of assigning an area to a particular center to avoid this area being assigned to
another center located on the opposite side of a given natural boundary.
Hess and Samuels (1971) extended the location-allocation methodology to the
sales districting model. In this case, the regions are designed to equalize regional
workload rather than regional population. The authors prefer the relaxed version
proposed by Weaver and Hess (1963), where fractional assignations are adjusted
a posteriori. The Hess and Samuels model is also extended by Zoltners (1979) to
allow the incorporation of more than one attribute to be equalized across regions.
Helbig, Orr, and Roediger (1972) formulated a heuristic and an integer pro-
gramming model very similar to the one proposed by Hess et al. (1965). The
authors assume that each area has a relatively equal population. This assumption
makes it possible to replace the two sets of constraints related to the upper and
lower bound for regional population with a set of constraints specifying the
number of areas per region. Both the number of areas per region and the location
of region centers are then adjusted iteratively by running the model several
times. This modiﬁcation avoids having to deal with fractional assignations of
areas.
George, Lamar, and Wallace (1997) incorporated modiﬁcations to Hess et al.
(1965) and presented three new versions of the model. The ﬁrst one incorporated
nonlinear penalty functions for deviations from the target regional population,
in such a way that the bigger the deviation from the desired regional population,
the bigger the penalty. The second one offers the possibility of inducing the
model to create a similar solution to a given preexisting solution by introducing
a function that reduces the distance from an area to a given center if they appear
together in the preexisting solution. The third one avoids having a region split
by natural boundaries by introducing a penalty function that increases the dis-
tance between an area and the centers located in the opposite side of the natural
boundary.
10
Recently, Bacao, Lobo, and Painho (2005) proposed a methodology that
applies genetic algorithms to deﬁne the location of the region centers. The algo-
rithm starts by creating an initial set of solutions. Each solution comprises a set
of region centers, the assignation of each area to the closest region centers, and
a value for the aggregation criterion. With this initial set of solutions, new solu-
tions are created by applying selection, crossover, and mutation operators to
improve the aggregation criteria. The algorithm stops when a predeﬁned number
of solutions are generated without improvements in the aggregation criteria.
Most of the methods derived from Weaver and Hess (1963) usually place the
emphasis on regional equality—for example, population or workload equality,
and regional compactness. In these methods, regional homogeneity is assumed
to be indirectly reached by imposing compactness. This assumption is related to
200 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
Tobler’s ﬁrst law of geography: ‘‘Everything is related to everything else, but
near things are more related than distant things’’ (Tobler 1970, 236). Another
common characteristic of these approaches is that they incorporate the concept
of regional center, which is usually located in a highly populated area within the
region. In some cases, researchers are not interested in having this type of hier-
archy in the regionalization process.
An alternative way of regionalizing via compactness, while taking into account
regional homogeneity, is to include the x and y coordinates of the centroids of
the areas as two additional classiﬁcation variables. This can be seen as a two-
objective aggregation criterion. The ﬁrst objective uses nongeographical classiﬁ-
cation variables (for example, socioeconomic variables) to measure within-region
homogeneity. The second objective uses geographical variables (for example, x
and y coordinates) to measure the regional compactness. These two objectives are
combined to calculate pairwise similarities between areas in such a way that areas
geographically near to each other are likely to be assigned to the same cluster.
Once the pairwise similarity has been estimated, either hierarchical or partitioning
clustering algorithm may be used to aggregate the areas.
11
There are many ways to combine geographical distances and nongeographi-
cal dissimilarities into a single pairwise similarity value. Webster and Burrough
(1972), Cliff et al. (1975), and Perruchet (1983) proposed different multiplica-
tive and additive forms to combine such elements. These authors also applied
hierarchical agglomerative algorithms for merging areas.
12
Wise, Hainings, and Ma (1997) formulated a multiobjective function with
three objectives: (1) homogeneity, measured as the within-region variance of a
set of attributes; (2) compactness, measured as the distance between the centroid
of each area and the centroid of the region it is assigned to; and (3) equality,
measured as the difference between the total value of an attribute for all areas in
a region and the mean total of this attribute for all regions. These three objec-
tives are then combined in an additive form and the areas are aggregated by
applying a k-means clustering algorithm.
The main drawback in formulating a multiobjective aggregation criterion is
that we have to determine the proper individual weight for each objective
(homogeneity, equality, compactness, etc.). For example, the weight assigned to
the compactness objective should be strong enough to guarantee spatial contigu-
ity (Webster and Burrough 1972; Wise, Haining, and Ma 1997; Openshaw,
Alvanides, and Whalley 1998). This assignation of weights has been the main
source of criticism of this methodology, since it becomes another source of
variation in the ﬁnal solution.
Regional compactness has been a very important characteristic in problems
like political districting and sales territory assignment. But it may not be a
desired characteristic when the researcher is interested in detecting spatial pat-
terns that can lead to elongated regions. Note also that in these methods there is
not much ‘‘freedom’’ in the way the relationships (similarities) between areas
are deﬁned. These methods require a similarity function directly related to the
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 201
position of the areas in the geographical space; therefore, the closer the areas to
a regional center, the higher the possibility of assigning those areas to that cen-
ter. Finally, some of these methods represent the areas by their centroids. This
representation is often criticized because the ﬁnal solution is, in most cases, sen-
sitive to the selection of those centroids. This sensitivity can become a big issue
when the areas to be aggregated are large (Horn 1995; Martin, Nolan, and
Tranmer 2001).
ALGORITHMS WITH AN EXPLICIT
SPATIAL CONTIGUITY CONSTRAINT
The methods covered in this section include, within their solution process,
additional instruments that ensure the spatial contiguity of each region. This
implies that these models require information about the spatial neighboring rela-
tionships between areas.
We classify these methods into three main categories: exact optimization
models, heuristic models, and hybrid or mixed heuristic models.
USE OF EXACT OPTIMIZATION MODELS
FOR THE REGIONALIZATION PROBLEM
The aggregation of n areas into m spatially contiguous regions while optimiz-
ing a predeﬁned aggregation criterion is not an easy problem to solve optimally
(Altman 1998). Cliff and Haggett (1970), Cliff et al. (1975), and Keane (1975)
used combinatorial mathematics to approximate the number of feasible solutions
for a regionalization problem. Since this number depends not only on the num-
ber of areas and regions but also on how the areas are distributed in the space,
these authors focused on providing the lower and upper bounds of the total num-
ber of aggregations. The upper bound results from a totally unconstrained for-
mulation where each area can be grouped with any other area. The lower bound
tries to incorporate the spatial distribution by assuming the extreme case where
the areas form a chain, and each area can only be grouped with its neighbors.
13
However, the impressive progress of computational capabilities has made it
possible to provide optimal solutions for problems that only a few years ago
were insurmountable. As an example, Bixby et al. (2000) uses a Patient Distri-
bution System problem with 49,944 rows, 177,628 columns, and 393,657 non-
zero variables to illustrate the signiﬁcant improvements in running times
through the different versions of CPLEX. With a 296 MHz Sun UltraSparc, the
running times went from 57 , 840 seconds with CPLEX 1.0 (1988) to 165 sec-
onds with CPLEX 6.5 (1999).
14
The main challenge for solving regionalization problems via exact methods is
to ﬁnd an efﬁcient way to deal with the contiguity constraint. In this section, we
describe different strategies for incorporating spatial contiguity constraint in
optimization models.
202 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
Zoltners and Sinha (1983) improved the model proposed by Zoltners (1979). In
this new proposal, the authors introduce information into the model about adja-
cency/contiguity between areas to control the contiguity constraint. There are
many alternatives for deﬁning spatial contiguity between areas; in this particular
case, Zoltners and Sinha use the road and highway network as a way to represent
how areas are interconnected. This representation takes into account natural obsta-
cles such as mountains, lakes, and rivers. Up to this point, the territory has been
represented as a network with nodes representing the areas and links representing
the roads connecting areas. Next, a sequence of steps is performed to reduce the
number of links in the network. First, a set of areas are selected to be region
centers, as many areas as there are regions to be designed. Second, the shortest
path between each center and other areas is calculated using travel time as link
weights. Finally, the solution from the shortest paths is used to obtain information
on the number of adjacency levels between each area and the centers.
15
With this information, Zoltners and Sinha formulated a linear optimization
model with a decision variable xij = 1 if region i includes area j, and xij = 0
otherwise. The key constraint that ensures spatial contiguity is that an area j can
be assigned to center i at adjacency level k if there exists a neighboring area of
j assigned to the same center at adjacency level k − 1.
Duque (2004) formulated the regionalization problem as a mixed integer pro-
gramming model. As in the method we just saw, Duque borrows concepts from
graph theory to deal with the spatial contiguity constraint. Thus, the areas and their
neighboring relationships are represented as a connected graph with nodes repre-
senting areas and links representing ﬁrst order spatial connectivity between areas.
According to graph theory, the aggregation ofn areas into m contiguous regions
can be achieved by selecting n-m links from the connected graph. These n-m links
can be understood as a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition. An additional condi-
tion for feasibility imposes that every pair of areas belonging to the same region
must be connected by one and only one combination of links.
16 In the literature,
this last condition has been referred to as the subtour breaking constraint.
Duque’s formulation includes a set of subtour breaking constraints. It is clear
that the enumeration of all potential subtours can be extremely difﬁcult and inef-
ﬁcient. An alternative approach to dealing with subtours is proposed by Current,
Revelle, and Cohon (1984) for the shortest covering path problem. It consists of
solving a relaxed formulation that does not take into account any subtour break-
ing constraints. Then, if the solution contains subtours, they are eliminated by
adding the proper subtour breaking constraints and solving the problem again.
This process is repeated until a feasible solution is obtained.
Three sets of binary decision variables are used in Duque’s formulation:
Xijk
1; if area i and jjj ∈ Ni belong to the same region k, with i < j and Ni =
set of areas j sharing a border with area i,
0; otherwise;
8
<
:
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 203
Yik
1; if areas i belongs to region k,
0; otherwise;
/C26
Tij
1; if areas i and j belong to the same region k, with i < j;
0; otherwise;
/C26
The set of variables Xijk are used to select the n /C0 m links, and the set of vari-
ables Tij are used to select all the pairwise dissimilarities between the areas
assigned to the same region.
The linear objective function is formulated as the minimization of the sum of
all pairwise dissimilarities between the areas assigned to the same region,
Min Pn
i¼1
Pn
j¼1
Dij · Tij, with Dij deﬁned as the dissimilarity relationships between
areas i and j, with i < j.
Later, Duque, Church, and Middleton (2006) formulated three new models for
solving the regionalization problem. The three formulations have the same objec-
tive function used by Duque (2004), but each one applies a different strategy to
satisfy the spatial contiguity constraint. They are named Tour
RM, Order RM, and
FlowRM.
TourRM selects n-m links and prevents subtours by adapting the Miller-Tucker-
Zemlin (MTZ) constraints with lifting proposed by Desrochers and Laporte
(1991). MTZ constraints were originally formulated by Miller, Tucker, and Zemlin
(1960) for the t r a v e l i n gs a l e s m a np r o b l e m(TSP). The strategy consists of having a
decision variable,u
i, that numerates the areas in such a way that area i must have a
value lower than area j if there exists a directed link leading from i to j. Whereas
the TSP imposes that each area can have at most one entering and one leaving link,
Tour
RM allows areas to have more than one entering link to provide the ﬂexibility
needed to create any regional shape. The set of decision variables are:
Xij
1; if the link from area i to jjj ∈ Ni is selected, with Ni = set of areas
j sharing a border with area i,
0; otherwise;
8
<
:
Tij
1; if the areas i and j belong, to the same region with i < j
0; otherwise;
/C26
ui Integer value assigned to area i
OrderRM is based on the contiguity constraint formulated by Cova and
Church (2000). In this case, the spatial contiguity constraint is achieved by
selecting a core area per region. The remaining areas are assigned to one core
area by taking into account the spatial contiguity order between the area and its
corresponding core area. Thus, area i can be assigned to core area j at order o if
204 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
and only if there is at least one area in the neighborhood of i that is assigned to j
at order o /C0 1. The set of decision variables are:
Xiko
1; if areas i is assigned to area j at order o;
0; otherwise;
/C26
Tij
1; if areas i and j belong to the same region k with i < j;
0; otherwise;
/C26
FlowRM solves the regionalization problem by adapting Shirabe’s model for
the spatial unit allocation problem (Shirabe 2005). Shirabe’s model is based on
network ﬂow theory in which the contiguity constraint is satisﬁed by designing
a connected subnetwork representing ﬂuid movement from multiple sources to a
single sink. Flow
RM extends Shirabe’s model for a single region to solve the
problem for m regions. The set of decision variables are:
Fijk
Nonnegative contiguous variable indicating the amount of flow
from area i to j in region k;
/C26
Yik
1; if areas i belongs to the region k;
0; otherwise;
/C26
Wik
1; if areas i is choosen as sink for region k;
0; otherwise;
/C26
Tij
1; if areas i and j belong to the same region k with i < j;
0; otherwise;
/C26
Finally, we should mention two additional approaches to the regionalization
problem in the context of optimization models. The ﬁrst is a nonlinear optimiza-
tion model formulated by Macmillan and Pierce (1994) where, to guarantee that
the n areas assigned to a region are spatially contiguous, it is sufﬁcient to ensure
that the (n − 1)th power of their binary contiguity matrix has no zero terms. And
second, Garﬁnkel and Nemhauser (1970) formulated a linear optimization
model that requires the enumeration of all the feasible regions as input. Then,
the binary decision variable x
j is used to select a predeﬁned number of regions,
such that each area belongs to one and only one region. Mehrotra, Johnson, and
Nemhauser (1998) used a similar approach, but in this case, the set of feasible
regions is generated with a column generation technique (Barnhart et al. 1998),
which creates new solutions from an initial feasible solution.
Exact formulations for the regionalization problem are computationally inten-
sive and their application is still limited to very small problems. As a very simple
illustration, Table 1 presents the results for Tour
RM, Order RM, and Flow RM
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 205
models using ILOG CPLEX 9.0 on a Sun Blade 2500, 500 MHz, 2Gb RAM to
aggregate the fourteen counties in Vermont into three and nine regions.
HEURISTIC MODELS FOR THE REGIONALIZATION PROBLEM
This section will cover different heuristic models for regionalizing. These
models have been widely applied in the literature since the early 1960s, and they
have proved to be highly effective in cases in which a large number of areas are
to be aggregated. The main goal of heuristic models consists of ﬁnding, in a rea-
sonable time, a solution as close as possible to the optimal, which in most cases
is unknown. The ability to escape from local optimal solutions to reach a good
solution is a very important component of the heuristic approaches. An addi-
tional challenge for heuristic models in the regionalization context is the ability
to efﬁciently move from one solution to another neighboring solution without
breaking the spatial contiguity constraint.
This review covers four types of heuristics: (1) heuristics based on hierarchical
clustering algorithms where only contiguous regions can be merged, (2) heuris-
tics where each region starts from an area (seed area) to which other neighboring
areas are added, (3) heuristics that start from an initial feasible solution and
search for improvements by swapping areas between regions, and (4) heuristics
based on graph theory.
Adapted hierarchical clustering algorithms. This methodology is another
way of using conventional hierarchical clustering methods to solve regionaliza-
tion problems. In this case, an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm is
modiﬁed in such a way that only spatially connected regions (clusters) are
allowed to be merged.
At the beginning of the algorithm, each area is a region by itself. Further
iterations merge one region at a time until reaching a predeﬁned number of
regions. The research in this area explores the use of different methods of
agglomerative hierarchical clustering, such as single linkage, complete linkage,
TABLE 1. Computational Results for Fourteen Counties in Vermont
3 Regions 9 Regions
TourRM OrderRM FlowRM TourRM OrderRM FlowRM
Rows–columns 1,215–159 585–427 698–337 1,215–159 1,150–525 1,863–767
OF 14.261 14.261 14.261 1.733 1.733 1.733
Best-time (sec)
a 29.16 47.04 120.8 0.37 9.56 79.29
Best-gap (%)a 60.63 97.30 24.79 1.96 100.00 100.00
Tot-time (sec) 16,180.39 10,800 147.55 0.37 10,800 10,800
Tot-gap (%) 0.01 37.15 0.01 0.01 73.94 100.00
Note: OF = objective function.
a. Time and gap reported when the best-integer is equal to the optimal solution.
206 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
average linkage, and Ward’s method, among others. Two characteristics are
explored in these methods: ﬁrst, their ability to identify different spatial patterns
(Lankford 1969; Byfuglien and Nordgard 1973); and second, how the spatial
contiguity constraint affects the dendograms, which are a graphical representa-
tion of the clustering solutions at different scales (Ferligoj and Batagelj 1982).
Other contributions to this topic have been made by Spence (1968), Webster
and Borrough (1972), and Margules, Faith, and Belbin (1985), who carry out
comparisons between different agglomerative hierarchical techniques when
imposing the contiguity constraint; Openshaw (1973), who proposes a way to
speed up the regionalization procedure based on hierarchical aggregation techni-
ques by reducing the number of calculations and restricting the size of the simi-
larity matrix by retaining only the similarities between contiguous areas; and
Perruchet (1983), who deﬁnes spatial contiguity based on the contiguity thresh-
old, which is the maximum distance beyond which two areas are not contiguous.
Hierarchical approaches can be useful when the researcher is interested in
nested solutions at different scales (number of regions). This nested solution
occurs because when two areas are merged at a given scale they are forced to be
together at higher scales. But when the researcher is interested only in a speciﬁc
scale, this approach may not be the best option, since the solution obtained is
conditioned to the solution at every lower scale (Bunge 1966).
Seeded regions. The main characteristic of these heuristics is that each region
is the result of selecting one area (seed area) to which other neighboring areas
are assigned. The seeds can be generated one at the time, which implies that the
next seed is selected after a region is completed; or in parallel, when all the
seeds are selected at once.
This methodology was ﬁrst proposed by Vickrey (1961) for solving district-
ing problems. Vickrey’s method starts by selecting an area at random, which is
the reference area. Next, the geographically furthest area from the reference area
is used as the initial seed for the ﬁrst region. Then, neighboring contiguous unas-
signed areas are added to the seed in order of increasing distance from it. The
adding process stops when the region satisﬁes a predeﬁned condition—for
example, a minimum population quota. When the ﬁrst region is ﬁnished, the
next region is designed by selecting as the initial seed the furthest unassigned
area from the reference area. The strategy of having reference areas was imple-
mented by Vickrey as a way to avoid the creation of enclaves, which are the
remaining unassigned areas that cannot be a region by themselves. Those
enclaves must be assigned to an already created region.
Thoreson and Liittschwager (1967) expanded Vickrey’s method in several
aspects. First, they proposed repeating the regionalization process several times
with different reference areas, to explore new solutions. And second, they intro-
duce a modiﬁcation of the algorithm to be used on a regular lattice.
Later, Gearhart and Liittschwager (1969) introduced other improvements to
Thoreson and Liittschwager’s algorithm by including new termination rules,
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 207
new ways to prevent the formation of enclaves, different alternatives to seed the
regions, and a more formal, clearer presentation of the algorithm.
The seeded regions approach has also been studied by Taylor (1973), Openshaw
(1977a, 1977b), and Rossiter and Johnston (1981). A common factor between
these contributions is that they select the set of seeds, called ‘‘core areas,’’ at the
beginning of the algorithm. Then, neighboring areas are added to the cores. The
process stops when all the areas are assigned. Rossiter and Johnston’s method does
not consider the next seed until a region has been ﬁnished, whereas Taylor and
Openshaw’s methods allow the regions to grow simultaneously.
Note that the algorithms derived from Vickrey’s contribution assume that the
number of regions is known. So, special attention must be paid to the criterion
used for stopping the addition of areas to a region. On one hand, if the minimum
population per region is set very low, then it is likely that the desired number of
regions is reached very fast, with many areas waiting for assignment (enclaves).
On the other hand, if the minimum population per regions is set very high, then
the algorithm will not be able to create as many regions as wanted.
Modiﬁcation of an initial feasible solution. The methods covered in this sec-
tion require as an input an initial feasible solution which is then iteratively mod-
iﬁed while searching for improvements in the aggregation criterion. A common
factor among these methods is that each iteration must be feasible in terms of
the spatial contiguity constraint.
This type of regionalization method was proposed by Nagel (1965) for redis-
tricting problems. The process starts from an initial feasible solution that is mod-
iﬁed by moving areas from their current region to another neighboring region.
Several conditions must be satisﬁed before allowing a move: ﬁrst, the donor
region (the region currently containing the area being moved) must have more
than one area. Second, the donor region cannot lose its spatial contiguity after
removing the area.
Nagel allows two types of moves. The basic one is to move one area at a
time. The second type of move involves trading areas, on a one-for-one basis,
between two neighboring regions.
17 These moves are allowed only if there is an
improvement in the aggregation criterion. The process stops when no improving
moves can be performed.
The contiguity constraint is tested by selecting one area within the region.
Then neighboring areas belonging to the same region are added until no more
areas can be added. If all the areas belonging to the region can be added, then
the region is spatially contiguous.
The algorithm automatic zoning procedure (AZP) proposed by Openshaw
(1977a) uses the same strategy, but it does not include trading moves. Although
the methodological approach was not innovative with respect to earlier contribu-
tions, the main contribution made by Openshaw was to use these regionalization
models to explore the effects of the modiﬁable areal unit problem.
208 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
Up to this point, all the algorithms were based on a hill-climbing procedure,
where only improving moves were allowed. Sammons (1978) highlighted the
need to allow these procedures to perform nonimproving moves to be able to
explore a wider range of feasible solutions and escape from local optimal solu-
tions, which are very likely to occur when these approaches are used. Sammons
also introduced a very interesting additional way to explore more solutions
based on merging/splitting regions: the number of merges must be equal to the
number of splits to maintain the number of desired regions. In the same book,
Openshaw (1978) presents an extension of Openshaw (1977a), where merging/
split moves are incorporated as well.
Ferligoj and Batagelj (1982) studied this methodology within the context of
clustering with relational constraint. The authors see the trading not only as use-
ful for exploring potential improvements on the aggregation criterion, but also
as a way of preserving the number of areas within each region. They also pro-
pose several ways to generate the initial feasible solution.
Browdy (1990) made an important contribution to this type of model. He for-
mulates a model for the redistricting problem where nonimproving moves are
possible by implementing a simulated annealing (SA) structure within the
searching process. SA allows nonimproving moves with a probability that
diminishes gradually over iteration time. In this algorithm, special attention
should be given to the deﬁnition of the initial parameters related to the cooling
schedule to ensure an appropriate trade-off between the execution time and a
good solution.
Macmillan and Pierce (1994) also used SA for redistricting problems in an
algorithm called ANNEAL. They proposed an alternative method for checking
for spatial contiguity called switching points, which proved to be more efﬁcient
than their method based on the powers of the binary contiguity matrix presented
in the section Use of Exact Optimization Models for the Regionalization Pro-
blem. The switching point method does not have to iterate over all the areas
assigned to the region; it only focuses on the area that is the candidate to be
removed from the donor region and its ﬁrst order neighbors, including those
neighbors assigned to other regions.
18 Empirical evidence on the performance
of the switching points method is provided by Macmillan (2001).
Openshaw and Rao (1995) proposed two alternative approaches for improv-
ing Openshaw’s AZP model. In one of the approaches, AZP-SA, nonimproving
moves of areas are allowed by using a SA scheme. The other approach, AZP-
tabu, uses a well-known heuristic procedure called tabu search algorithm,
19
which also attempts to escape from local optimal solutions by allowing nonim-
proving moves. In AZP-tabu, once an area is moved from one region to another,
its reverse move is prohibited for R subsequent iterations. R is then the length of
the tabu list and its value is a key parameter in the algorithm. The authors also
provide a version of AZP-tabu where the value of R is dynamically adjusted
during the searching process.
20
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 209
Horn (1995) also took up Sammons’ idea of implementing different types of
area moves and allowing for temporary changes in the number of regions. Horn
modiﬁes an initial feasible solution with three types of moves: zone-at-march,
moving an area from its region to a neighboring region; territory-at-march, mer-
ging two regions; and territory injection, selecting an area to create a new region.
Here the number of regions can deviate from a predeﬁned value to explore new
solutions. The allowed maximum deviation from the desired number of regions
is gradually reduced to zero to ensure a feasible solution. Finally, Horn stresses
the importance of implementing different types of moves and encourages the
exploration of moves that involve more than one area at a time.
Duque and Church (2004) introduced the algorithm called automatic region-
alization with initial seed location, where special attention is paid to the design
of a good initial feasible solution before performing a local search by moving
areas between regions. The algorithm has two stages. The ﬁrst stage uses a
seeded regions strategy to generate an initial feasible solution. Information on
how the aggregation criterion changes through the assignation process is used
to make changes in the initial set of seeds. This ﬁrst stage generates a set of fea-
sible solutions from where the best solution is chosen and then improved in a
second stage by applying a local search process based on a tabu search algo-
rithm. Using a good feasible solution as an input to the second stage will reduce
the possibility of getting trapped by a local optimal solution and also the number
of moves performed during the second stage.
21
Graph theory-based models. Maravalle and Simeone (1995) formulated a
heuristic model for regionalization based on graph theory. The heuristic called
MIDAS-me´thode ite´rative d’agre´gation spatiale represents the areas and their
spatial contiguity relationships as a connected graph ( G) where the link between
nodes/areas i and j means that those two areas share a border. The problem is
formulated as follows: ‘‘Given a connected graph G, in which a vector of char-
acteristics is associated with each vertex, ﬁnd a minimum inertia partition of the
vertex-set of G into a prescribed number of connected clusters’’ (Maravalle and
Simeone, 1995, 625).
The main steps of MIDAS are: ﬁrst, generation of a spanning tree T of G;
22
second, generation of an initial partition of T by deleting p − 1 links where p is
the number of regions to be designed; and third, the set of p − 1 deleted links is
iteratively modiﬁed by replacing one deleted link by another nondeleted link in
T. This replacement, which is a neighboring feasible solution of T, is allowed if
the new solution leads to an improvement in the aggregation criteria.
Since, for a given T, the number of neighboring solutions is very restricted,
the authors introduce a fourth step called tree-modiﬁcation which generates a
different spanning tree /C22T of G that results from replacing links in T by other
unselected links available on G. This new /C22T allows evaluation of new neighbor-
ing solutions that are not possible to evaluate from T. This process is repeated
until there are no improving moves to perform.
210 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
The main advantage of this approach is the fact that spatial contiguity con-
straint is maintained through the iterations without having to test for it at each
move, since deleting any combination p − 1 links from any spanning tree T of G
always leads to a feasible solution.
M
IXED HEURISTIC MODELS
Under this category, we classiﬁed the heuristics that combine heuristic and
exact optimization models to solve regionalization problems. The aim of these
models is to merge in one model the computational power of heuristic
approaches with the mathematical accuracy of exact models. This combination
has been made in two different ways: ﬁrst, the exact model can be applied in a
set of neighboring regions to redraw their borders, achieving improvements in
the aggregation criteria; second, information obtained from multiple solutions
generated by any regionalization heuristic is used to reduce the number of vari-
ables and constraints in an exact model.
The ﬁrst method was proposed by Duque (2004). The algorithm called Regio-
nalization Algorithm with Selective Search (RASS) has as a main assumption
that the design of contiguous and homogeneous regions is relevant only if there
exist both disparities between the areas, which justify the design of more than
one region, and some evidence of spatial dependence, which justiﬁes the
requirement of spatial contiguity. If these two properties are present in the data
set, then the information available on the relationships between areas can be cru-
cial in directing the search process in a more selective and less random fashion.
The algorithm starts by selecting a subset of m neighboring regions. The areas
belonging to those regions are passed to an optimization model to reaggregate
them into m regions.
23 Next, taking into account information on the relation-
ships between the areas, the algorithm decides which region should leave the set
of neighboring regions and which region should be added to the set to run the
optimization model again. Thus, the set of regions passed to the optimization
model keeps changing throughout the iteration process until a convergence
criterion is satisﬁed.
The aim of RASS is to take advantage of the optimization model by applying
it to a set of regions instead of trying to solve the whole problem at once. The
local improvements achieved with the optimization model may be more difﬁcult
to obtain with an area-swapping scheme.
Duque and Church (2004) formulated an alternative way of taking advantage
of the optimization model for regionalization problems. The authors propose the
adaptation of a well-known heuristic model known as heuristic concentration
(Rosing and ReVelle 1997). The central idea of this model is to use information
from multiple solutions, obtained by any regionalization heuristic, to reduce the
number of variables and constraints in the optimization model. The solution
obtained from the reduced optimization model will be at least as good as the
best solution obtained from the heuristic. The algorithm has two stages. The ﬁrst
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 211
stage runs a regionalization heuristic q times. The best m solutions are taken
from the q available solutions. The second stage uses those m solutions to reduce
an early version of the Order RM model presented in the section Use of Exact
Optimization Models for the Regionalization Problem. Thus, if a set of areas is
assigned to the same region in all the m solutions, those areas will be forced to
be together in the optimization model. This information can also be used to
reduce the index related to the maximum contiguity order ( o). Empirical evi-
dence shows that this procedure can reduce, on average, 83.8 percent of the con-
straints and 84.2 percent of the variables from the fully speciﬁed optimization
model.
Middleton (2006) proposed a similar approach. He formulates a heuristic
called heuristic distillation to reduce the Flow
RM model proposed by Duque,
Church, and Middleton (2006). The algorithm uses information from multiple
solutions obtained from any heuristic model. Next, information from the best m
solutions is used to reduce the Flow
RM model. Information on neighboring areas
that are never assigned to the same solution, and on areas that are always
assigned to the same region, is used to formulate a reduced version of the opti-
mization model. This process can reduce, on average, 79.53 percent of the con-
straints and 56.51 percent the variables from the fully speciﬁed Flow
RM
optimization model.
CONCLUSIONS
In this article, we review more than four decades of contributions to region-
alization methods, and we have also propose a taxonomy of the different regio-
nalization methods considered in the literature based on the strategy used to
satisfy the contiguity constraint. Table 2 shows the main topics considered in
the reviewed studies (column 2) following our proposed taxonomy (column 1).
Taking this information into account, our aim in this study was to provide a big
picture of the alternative methods that can be applied by researchers who see
ofﬁcial aggregations as a source of error when analyzing spatial data. This arti-
cle may also be a good starting point for researchers interested in developing
new regionalization techniques.
A ﬁrst conclusion from this review is that there is no ultimate regionalization
technique. Each technique has characteristics that can be desirable in some
applications but undesirable in other ones. In table 3 we provide an evaluation
of those methods in terms of a set of characteristics. This table can be used as a
guide for selecting a suitable regionalization method for a speciﬁc analysis.
Another conclusion is that, although there is a high degree of subjectivity in
the criteria these methods use, the application of structured and replicable regio-
nalization methods may reduce the criticism that the use of analytical regions
usually receives.
Based on this review, we envision various research lines that could contribute
greatly to this ﬁeld. First, elements from different regionalization strategies
(text continues on page 216)
212 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
TABLE 2. Overview of the Regionalization Methods Literature
Method Topics Addressed Study
1. Regionalization via conventional
clustering algorithms
Regionalization in two stages Openshaw (1973); Openshaw and Wymer (1995)
Sensitivity of regionalization results to different
clustering algorithms
Johnston (1968); Lankford (1969); Fischer (1980)
Simulated annealing variant of the k-means algorithm Openshaw and Wymer (1995)
Consideration of natural boundaries
2. Regionalization via maximization
of regional compactness
Consideration of preexisting aggregations Mills (1967); Segal and Weinberger (1977); George,
Lamar, and Wallace (1997)
Fractional assignments George, Lamar, and Wallace (1997)
Integer programming formulation Helbig, Orr, and Roediger (1972)
Quantitative measure of compactness Hess et al. (1965); Helbig, Orr, and Roediger (1972)
Types of moves of areas between regions Weaver and Hess (1963)
Use of genetic algorithms Kaiser (1966)
Weighted combination of multiple aggregation criteria Bacao, Lobo, and Painho (2005)
Kaiser (1966); Cliff et al. (1975); Zoltners (1979); Wise,
Haining, and Ma (1997)
3. Exact optimization models Alternative way to deﬁne adjacency between areas Zoltners and Sinha (1983)
Complexity of the regionalization problem Duque, Church, and Middleton (2006)
Alternative ways to satisfy contiguity constraint Cliff and Haggett (1970); Cliff et al. (1975); Keane (1975);
Altman (1998)
Contiguity constraint based on adjacency level Zoltners and Sinha (1983)
Contiguity constraint based on subtour breaking
constraints
Duque (2004)
Contiguity constraint based on the power of the
contiguity matrix
Macmillan and Pierce (1994)
Solution obtained by the union of predesigned
feasible regions
Garﬁnkel and Nemhauser (1970); Mehrotra, Johnson,
and Nemhauser (1998)
(continued)
213
TABLE 2. (continued)
Method Topics Addressed Study
4. Adapted hierarchical clustering
algorithms
Comparison of hierarchical methods Spence (1968); Webster and Burrough (1972); Byfuglien
and Nordgard (1973); Margules, Faith, and Belbin (1985)
Hierarchical methods and the identiﬁcation of spatial
patterns
Byfuglien and Nordgard (1973)
Monotonic and nonmonotonic hierarchical clustering
strategies with contiguity constraint
Ferligoj and Batagelj (1982)
Reduction of similarity matrix Openshaw (1973)
Spatial contiguity based on contiguity threshold Perruchet (1983)
Sub-optimality of hierarchical algorithms Bunge (1966)
5. Seeded regions Multistart algorithm Thoreson and Liittschwager (1967)
Use of irregular and regular lattices Thoreson and Liittschwager (1967)
Ways to grow the regions Vickrey (1961); Taylor (1973); Openshaw (1977a);
Openshaw (1977b); Rossiter and Johnston (1981)
Ways to prevent enclaves Gearhart and Liittschwager (1969)
Ways to seed the regions Gearhart and Liittschwager (1969)
6. Modiﬁcation of an initial
feasible solution
Types of moves of areas between regions Nagel (1965); Openshaw (1977a); Openshaw (1978);
Sammons (1978); Ferligoj and Batagelj (1982);
Browdy (1990); Horn (1995)
Use of simulated annealing Browdy (1990); Macmillan and Pierce (1994);
Macmillan (2001); Openshaw and Rao (1995)
Use of tabu search Openshaw and Rao (1995); Duque and Church (2004)
Ways to check for spatial contiguity (switching points) Macmillan and Pierce (1994); Macmillan (2001)
7. Graph theory-based models Use of spanning tree Maravalle and Simeone (1995)
8. Mixed heuristic models Break the regionalization problem into subproblems Duque (2004)
Use of heuristic concentration Duque and Church (2004)
Use of heuristic distillation Middleton (2006)
214
TABLE 3. Regionalization Methods and Their Main Characteristics
Regionalization Method
Without an Explicit Spatial
Contiguity Constraint With an Explicit Spatial Contiguity Constraint
Characteristics
Conventional
Clustering
Algorithms
Maximization of
Regional
Compactness
Exact
Models
Adapted
Hierarchical
Clustering
Algorithms
Seeded
Regions
Modiﬁcation
of an Initial
Feasible
Solution
Graph
Theory-Based
Models
Mixed
Heuristics
Number of regions is required /C252/C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252
Information about all pairwise relationships
can be considered
/C252/C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252
Relationships between areas do not
have to be geographically dependent
/C252 × /C252/C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252
Neighboring relationships must be provided ×× /C252/C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252
Guaranteed spatial contiguity ×× /C252/C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252
Regional shape is not constrained /C252 × /C252/C252 /C252 /C252 /C252 /C252
Optimal solution is guaranteed ×× /C252a ××× × ×
May be used to solve large regionalization
problemsb
/C252/C252 × /C252/C252/C252 /C252 ×
May be easily adapted to any aggregation
criterion
×× × × /C252/C252 /C252 ×
a. Only for Tour RM, OrderRM, and FlowRM models.
b. Sixty-seven areas into ﬁfteen regions has been the largest problem solved by applying Heuristic Distillation to reduce the fully speciﬁed Flow RM model (Middleton
2006). The reduced Flow RM was solved with CPLEX 9.0 on a Sun Blade 2500, 500 MHz CPU, 2Gb RAM.
215
could be combined, leading to more powerful algorithms. Second, alternative
ways of improving the computational tractability of exact optimization models
for regionalization problems are needed. Third, less randomized aggregation
processes could be designed by taking advantage of the available data (not only
from classiﬁcation variables but also from the spatial conﬁguration of areas).
Fifth, those models based on swapping or trading moves of areas could be
extended toward the design of more aggressive moves that allow improvements
in the local search process. And sixth, research addressed to assessing the real
beneﬁts of using analytical regions is needed.
NOTES
1. Regionalization methods are also known as spatially constrained aggregation methods, zone
design, and constrained clustering, among others.
2. See Johnson (1967), Anderberg (1973), Everitt (1993), and Gordon (1999) for a review of
clustering methods.
3. A restriction widely imposed in districting literature (Gillman 2002).
4. Simulated annealing was formulated as an optimization procedure by Kirkpatrick, Gelatt,
and Vecchi (1983) and ﬁrst applied in the redistricting problem by Browdy (1990).
5. This criterion makes highly populated areas good candidates for selection as the initial set of
centers.
6. It was theoretical because solving the new formulation was computationally difﬁcult at that
time. For empirical purposes, the authors continued to use the procedure proposed by Weaver and
Hess (1963).
7. The use of a relative measure of compactness places more emphasis on regional shape than
on regional size, since regional size depends on the spatial distribution of population when equal
population is required. Thus, the lower the population density, the bigger the region must be to reach
a given regional population.
8. Note that these moves do not take into account the feasibility in terms of spatial contiguity.
9. In Mills’s application, the natural boundary was the river Avon in Bristol.
10. This way of introducing information about natural boundaries is more relaxed than the
permanent assignations proposed by Mills (1967). A similar strategy was implemented by Segal and
Weinberger (1977), who replaced the squared Euclidean distance of a straight line between each
center and all the other areas by the length of the shortest path between each center and all the other
areas.
11. Although this methodology may be considered a slight variation on the one introduced in the
section Regionalization via Conventional Clustering Algorithms, there are two important differences
that make us classify this strategy here. First, it achieves spatial contiguity by forcing the regions to
be compact, which implies a different and more restrictive assumption about the shapes of the
regions to design. Second, when using this methodology, the researcher has to deal with technical
issues, like how nongeographical and geographical variables are going to be combined into a single
similarity function.
12. Cliff et al. (1975) aggregated the areas by using a minimum spanning tree algorithm, which
is equivalent to a single linkage hierarchical agglomerative clustering.
13. The number of feasible solutions for a regionalization problem involving the aggregation of
ten areas into ﬁve regions is a number between 126 and 42,525 (Keane 1975).
14. See Bixby (2002) for more information about this topic.
15. To make the reduction less restrictive, the authors also included additional links taken from
near optimal shortest paths solutions. This implies that there may exist more than one path connect-
ing an area to a given center at different or equal adjacency levels.
216 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
16. For more information on the properties of this (and other) conﬁgurations, see Ahuja,
Magnanti, and Orlin (1993).
17. When trading two areas, each must touch the neighboring region in an area other than the
area being traded. This move cannot break the contiguity constraint of either of the two regions
involved in the trading.
18. The authors enumerate the special cases where this methodology may fail.
19. For more information on the tabu search algorithm, see Glover (1977, 1989, 1990).
20. The possibility of dynamically adjusting the value of R is known as the reactive tabu search
(Battiti and Tecchiolli 1994).
21. The number of moves is reduced on average by 36.4 percent with respect to the total number
of moves required by AZP-tabu.
22. The authors applied Kruskal’s algorithm in this step (Kruskal 1956).
23. Proposed by Duque (2004) and presented in the section Use of Exact Optimization Models
for the Regionalization Problem.
REFERENCES
Ahuja, R. K., T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin. 1993. Network ﬂows: Theory, algorithms, and applica-
tions. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Altman, M. 1998. Districting principles and democratic representation. PhD diss., California Institute
of Technology.
Amrhein, C. G. and R. Flowerdew. 1992. The effect of data aggregation on a Poisson regression
model of Canadian migration. Environment and Planning A 24: 1381–91.
Anderberg, M. R. 1973. Cluster analysis for applications. New York: Academic Press, Inc.
Arbia, G. 1989. Spatial data conﬁguration in statistical analysis of regional economic and related
problems. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
Bacao, F., V. Lobo, and M. Painho. 2005. Applying genetic algorithms to zone design. Soft Comput-
ing 9: 341–48.
Barnhart, C., E. L. Johnson, G. L. Nemhauser, M. W. P. Savelsbergh, and P. H. Vance. 1998.
Branch-and-price: Column generation for solving huge integer programs. Operations Research
46: 316–29.
Battiti, R. and G. Tecchiolli. 1994. The reactive tabu search. ORSA Journal on Computing 6:
126–40.
Bixby, R. E. 2002. Solving real-world linear programs: A decade and more of progress. Operations
Research 50: 3–15.
Bixby, R. E., M. Fenelon, Z. Gu, E. Rothberg, and R. Wunderling. 2000. MIP: Theory and practice—
Closing the gap. http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/bixby00mip.html (accessed June 19, 2006).
Browdy, M. H. 1990. Simulated annealing: An improved computer model for political redistricting.
Yale Law & Policy Review 8: 163–79.
Bunge, W. 1966. Gerrymandering, geography, and grouping. Geographical Review 56: 256–63.
Byfuglien, J. and A. Nordgard. 1973. Region-building: A comparison of methods. Norwegian
Journal of Geography 27: 127–51.
Cliff, A. D., and P. Haggett. 1970. On the efﬁciency of alternative aggregations in region-building
problems. Environment and Planning 2: 285–94.
Cliff, A. D., P. Haggett, J. K. Ord, K. A. Bassett, and R. B. Davies. 1975. Elements of spatial
structure: A quantitative approach. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cova, T. J., and R. L. Church. 2000. Contiguity constraints for single-region site search problems.
Geographical Analysis 32: 306–29.
Current, J., C. Revelle, and J. Cohon. 1984. The shortest covering path problem: An application of
locational constraints to network design. Journal of Regional Science 24: 161–83.
Desrochers, M., and G. Laporte. 1991. Improvements and extensions to the Miller-Tucker-Zemlin
subtour elimination constraints. Operations Research Letters 10: 27–36.
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 217
Duque, J. C. 2004. Design of homogeneous territorial units. A methodological proposal and applica-
tions. PhD diss., University of Barcelona.
Duque, J. C., and R. L. Church. 2004. A new heuristic model for designing analytical regions. Paper
presented at the North American Meeting of the International Regional Science Association,
Seattle, WA, November.
Duque, J. C., R. L. Church, and R. S. Middleton. 2006. Exact models for the regionalization problem.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Western Regional Science Association, Santa Fe,
February.
Eurostat (2006). Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics—NUTS: Statistical regions of Europe.
http://ec.europa.eu/comm/eurostat/ramon/nuts/basicnuts_regions_en.html (accessed June 19,
2006).
Everitt, B. S. 1993. Cluster analysis. 3rd ed. New York: Halsted Press.
Ferligoj, A., and V. Batagelj. 1982. Clustering with relational constraint. Psychometrika 47: 413–26.
Fischer, M. M. 1980. Regional taxonomy: A comparison of some hierarchic and non-hierarchic
strategies. Regional Science and Urban Economics 10: 503–37.
Fotheringham, A. S., and D. W. S. Wong. 1991. The modiﬁable areal unit problem in multivariate
statistical-analysis. Environment and Planning A 23: 1025–44.
Garﬁnkel, R. S., and G. L. Nemhauser. 1970. Optimal political districting by implicit enumeration
techniques. Management Science Series B-Application 16: B495–B508.
Gearhart, B. C., and J. M. Liittschwager. 1969. Legislative districting by computer. Behavioral
Science 14: 404–17.
George, J. A., B. W. Lamar, and C. A. Wallace. 1997. Political district determination using large-
scale network optimization. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 31: 11–28.
Gillman, R. 2002. Geometry and gerrymandering. Math Horizons 10: 10–12.
Glover, F. (1977). Heuristic for integer programming using surrogate constraints. Decision Science
8: 156–66.
———. 1989. Tabu search. Part I. ORSA Journal on Computing 1: 190–206.
———. 1990. Tabu search. Part II. ORSA Journal on Computing 2: 4–32.
Gordon, A. D. 1996. A survey of constrained classiﬁcation. Computational Statistics & Data
Analysis 21: 17–29.
———. 1999. Classiﬁcation. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall-CRC.
Helbig, R. E., P. K. Orr, and R. R. Roediger. 1972. Political redistricting by computer. Communica-
tions of the ACM 15: 735–41.
Hess, S. W., and S. A. Samuels. 1971. Experiences with a sales districting model: Criteria and imple-
mentation. Management Science Series B-Application 18: P41–P54.
Hess, S. W., J. B. Weaver, H. J. Siegfeld, J. N. Whelan, and P. A. Zitlau. 1965. Nonpartisan political
redistricting by computer. Operations Research 13: 998–1006.
Horn, M. E. T. 1995. Solution techniques for large regional partitioning problems. Geographical
Analysis 27: 230–48.
Johnson, S. C. 1967. Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika 32: 241–54.
Johnston, R. J. 1968. Choice in classiﬁcation: The subjectivity of objective methods. Annals of the
AAG 58: 575–89.
Kaiser, H. F. 1966. An objective method for establishing legislative districts. Midwest Journal of
Political Science 10: 200–13.
Keane, M. 1975. The size of region-building problem. Environment and Planning A 7: 575–77.
Kirkpatrick, S., C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi. 1983. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science
220: 671–80.
Kruskal, J. B. 1956. On the shortest spanning subtree and the traveling salesman problem. Proceed-
ings of the American Mathematical Society 7: 48–50.
Lankford, P. M. 1969. Regionalization: Theory and alternative algorithms. Geographical Analysis 1:
196–212.
Macmillan, W. 2001. Redistricting in a GIS environment: An optimization algorithm using switching
points. Journal of Geographical Systems 3: 167–80.
218 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)
Macmillan, W., and T. Pierce. 1994. Optimization modelling in a GIS framework: The problem of
political redistricting. In Spatial analysis and GIS , edited by Stewart Fotheringham and Peter
Rogerson, 221–46. London: Taylor & Francis.
MacQueen, J. B. 1967. Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis of multivariate observations.
Proceedings of 5th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability 1: 281–97.
Maravalle, M., and B. Simeone. 1995. A spanning tree heuristic for regional clustering. Communica-
tions in Statistics-Theory and Methods 24: 625–39.
Margules, C. R., D. P. Faith, and L. Belbin. 1985. An adjacency constraint in agglomerative
hierarchical classiﬁcations of geographic data. Environment and Planning A 17: 397–412.
Martin, D., A. Nolan, and M. Tranmer. 2001. The application of zone-design methodology in the
2001 UK census. Environment and Planning A 33: 1949–62.
Mehrotra, A., E. L. Johnson, and G. L. Nemhauser. 1998. An optimization based heuristic for politi-
cal districting. Management Science 44: 1100–14.
Middleton, R. S. 2006. Geographical distillation: Application of the p-median, traveling salesman,
and regionalization problems. PhD diss., University of California at Santa Barbara.
Miller, C. E., A. W. Tucker, and R. A. Zemlin. 1960. Integer programming formulation of traveling
salesman problems. Journal of the ACM 7: 326–29.
Mills, G. 1967. The determination of local government electoral boundaries. Operational Research
Quarterly 18: 243–55.
Murtagh, F. 1985. A survey of algorithms for contiguity-constrained clustering and related problems.
Computer Journal 28: 82–88.
Nagel, S. S. 1965. Simpliﬁed bipartisan computer redistricting. Stanford Law Review 17:863–99.
Openshaw, S. 1973. A regionalisation program for large data sets. Computer Applications 3/4:
136–47.
———. 1977a. A geographical solution to scale and aggregation problems in region-building, parti-
tioning and spatial modeling. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 2: 459–72.
———. 1977b. Optimal zoning systems for spatial interaction models. Environment and Planning A
9: 169–84.
———. 1978. An optimal zoning approach to the study of spatially aggregated data. In Spatial
representation and spatial interaction , edited by Ian Masser and Peter J. B. Brown, 95–113.
Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff.
———. 1984. The modiﬁable areal unit problem . Concepts and Techniques in Modern Geography
38. Norwich, UK: GeoBooks.
Openshaw, S., S. Alvanides, and S. Whalley. 1998. Some further experiments with designing output
areas for the 2001 UK census. www.geog.leeds.ac.uk/papers/98-9/ (accessed June 19, 2006).
Openshaw, S., and L. Rao. 1995. Algorithms for reengineering 1991 census geography. Environment
and Planning A 27: 425–46.
Openshaw, S., and P. J. Taylor. 1981. The modiﬁable areal unit problem. In Quantitative geography,
edited by N. Wrigley and R. J. Bennett, pages 60–70. London: Routledge.
Openshaw, S., and C. Wymer. 1995. Classifying and regionalizing census data. In Census users
handbook, ed. S. Openshaw, 239–70. Cambridge, UK, GeoInformation International.
Paelinck, J. H. P. 2000. On aggregation in spatial econometric modeling. Journal of Geographical
Systems 2: 157–65.
Paelinck, J. H. P., and L. H. Klaassen. 1979. Spatial econometric. Farnborough, UK: Saxon House.
Perruchet, C. 1983. Constrained agglomerative hierarchical-classiﬁcation. Pattern Recognition 16:
213–17.
Robinson, W. S. 1950. Ecological correlations and the behavior of individuals. American Sociologi-
cal Review 15: 351–57.
Rosing, K. E., and C. S. ReVelle. 1997. Heuristic concentration: Two stage solution construction.
European Journal of Operational Research 97: 75–86.
Rossiter, D. J., and R. J. Johnston. 1981. Program GROUP—The identiﬁcation of all possible solu-
tions to a constituency-delimitation problem. Environment and Planning A 13: 231–238.
Duque et al. / SUPERVISED REGIONALIZATION METHODS 219
Sammons, R. 1978. A simplistic approach to the redistricting problem. In Spatial representation and
spatial interaction, edited by Ian Masser and Peter J. B. Brown, 71–94. Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff.
Segal, M., and D. B. Weinberger. 1977. Turﬁng. Operations Research 25: 367–86.
Shirabe, T. 2005. A model of contiguity for spatial unit allocation. Geographical Analysis 37: 2–16.
Spence, N. A. 1968. A multifactor uniform regionalization of British counties on basis of employ-
ment data for 1961. Regional Studies 2: 87–104.
Taylor, P. J. 1973. Some implications of spatial organization of elections. Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers 60: 121–136.
Thoreson, J. D., and J. M. Liittschwager. 1967. Legislative districting by computer simulation.
Behavioral Science 12: 237–47.
Tobler, W. R. 1970. Computer movie simulating urban growth in detroit region. Economic Geography
46: 234–40.
Vickrey, W. 1961. On the prevention of gerrymandering. Political Science Quarterly 76: 105–10.
Weaver, J. B., and S. W. Hess. 1963. A procedure for nonpartisan districting: Development of
computer techniques. Yale Law Journal 73: 288–308.
Webster, R., and P. A. Burrough. 1972. Computer-based soil mapping of small areas from sample
data: Part 1—Multivariate classiﬁcation and ordination. Journal of Soil Science 23: 210–34.
Wise, S., R. Haining, and J. Ma. 2001. Providing spatial statistical data analysis functionality for the
GIS user: The SAGE project. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 15:
239–54.
Wise, S. M., R. P. Haining, and J. Ma. 1997. Regionalisation tools for exploratory spatial analysis of
health data. In Recent developments in spatial analysis: Spatial statistics, behavioural modelling,
and computational intelligence , edited by Manfred M. Fischer and Arthur Getis, 83–100. New
York: Springer.
Zoltners, A. A. 1979. A Uniﬁed Approach to Sales Territory Alignment. In Sales management: New
developments from behavioral and decision model research, ed. R. Bagozzi, 360–76. Cambridge,
MA: Marketing Science Institute.
Zoltners, A. A., and P. Sinha. 1983. Sales territory alignment: A review and model. Management
Science 29: 1237–56.
220 INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL SCIENCE REVIEW (Vol. 30, No. 3, 2007)